- The important is, is your
code good? We care about
excellent code. We don't care who you
are. Like maybe you're a dog. I don't
care, right? I don't care where you
come from. I need to look at your code.
Oh, yeah, but I'm an engineer
at this very large company in
Italy, in Germany, in the US. We
don't care. We care about the
quality of your code because this
is what defines our community
and which means that we have a lot of people
who contribute who are some very different
backgrounds and very introverted.
Sure. But that's okay, right?
- FFmpeg is probably one of the biggest CPU
users in the world. Everything we've just
said in the past couple of minutes,
every sentence is someone's
lifetime's work. There are books about
every sentence. So the level of complexity
in many cases is inordinate.
- FFmpeg has one hundred thousand lines
of assembly for all the codecs.
- For all codecs. Mm-hmm.
- And just this one has two hundred
and forty thousand. Every cycle
matters. We are talking
about probably three billion
devices which are going to decode
video nonstop because, for
example, thirty percent of the
video from Netflix is now in AV1,
fifty percent of YouTube.
- This is what peak video
codecs should look like.
Seventy-nine point nine percent
assembly, nineteen point six percent C,
and zero point five percent other.
- And what's incredible is with those tweets,
which is factual, people get crazy.
- For the last two years, they go crazy.
No, intrinsics is fine. The compiler-
- You can optimize your compiler.
Auto-vectorization, it's your fault. You don't
understand. And we've
tried that forever, right?
- For two years, and two years later,
showing hundreds of examples
of handwritten assembly. No, no, no, you're
doing it wrong. The compiler can do this.
The intelligence agencies tried to, like,
say, "Can you put a backdoor in VLC?"
- Yes. Two of them.
- Well, what did you say?
- No. Well, I was a lot less polite.
- Basically saying, "Hell no."
- Like, if we had to compromise our software,
we would shut it down. This is clear.
- Any tweets Kieran, you regret?
- Tweets I regret?
- Or is it like that, how does the
French song go? Regret nothing.
- Don't regret anything. No, it's because
regrets are attacks on your mind.
- The following is a conversation
all about FFmpeg and VLC
with Jean-Baptiste Kempf
and Kieran Kunhya.
FFmpeg is an open source
software system that is
the invisible backbone behind
YouTube, Netflix, Chrome,
VLC, Discord, and basically
every platform that
touches video or audio on the internet.
It can decode, encode,
transcode, stream, and
play almost any video or audio format ever
created. To me, it is one of
the most incredible software
systems ever developed, and
it's all done by volunteers.
VLC is also a legendary
piece of software. It is an
open source media player that plays
basically anything you throw at
it, any format, any platform,
no ads, no tracking.
It has been downloaded over
six billion times, and
again, for me, it has been
one of my favorite pieces of
software ever, with the most
legendary logo, which I,
of course, had to honor in this
conversation by wearing the
VLC traffic cone hat the whole time.
So again, above all else, thank
you to the incredible volunteer
engineers who put their heart and
soul into this code that has been
used and loved by billions
of people. Thank you.
And about the two great engineers and human
beings I'm talking to in this episode,
Jean-Baptiste is the
president of VideoLAN and
is a key figure behind VLC and FFmpeg.
Kieran is a longtime codec engineer, FFmpeg
contributor, and the man
behind the now infamous
FFmpeg account on
Twitter/X that I recommend
everybody follow for the memes and for the
unapologetic celebration of open source
and great low-level software engineering.
Let me also say that it's
inspiring and humbling that
so much of modern civilization
rests on software built by
people who are not chasing
fame or money, but are
obsessed with the craft of engineering.
We live in a world where billions of
people consume video every day without
ever thinking about the invisible
machinery underneath it. But that
machinery matters. Open source
infrastructure matters.
It is one of the great examples of
human beings quietly collaborating
across borders to build something useful,
durable, and elegant for the rest of us.
And so this conversation is
not just about codecs and
media pipelines. It is also
about the deeper spirit of
engineering and generosity that
makes projects like FFmpeg possible.
Again, I can never say
it enough. Thank you.
This is the Lex Fridman Podcast. To
support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description,
where you can also find links
to contact me, ask questions,
give feedback, and so on.
And now, dear friends, here's
Jean-Baptiste Kempf and Kieran Kunhya.
So the legend goes VLC can
open everything. What's the
weirdest thing that you
know that it can open?
- You know, there is a ton of people
who are using VLC to record VHS
videos, right? Like, it's just like you
plug it with a capture card and you
can basically record VHS video.
- Well, how does that work?
- Basically, it's, you know, those type of
capture card where you can put a Peritel
in or- ... or RCA, and you put that, and
actually VLC can play those type of cards,
and there is a module which allows
to control directly some of those
VCR camcorders. We support DVD
audios lately, right? We spent
the summer working on
DVD-Audio support, and
like there is no, no one's making any
DVD audio support. There is a custom
encryption schemes.
- What about Lucasfilm?
- Oh, yeah, and there is of course all the
weird codecs support, game codecs supported
by FFmpeg.
- The one Star Wars video game, the first ten-
second opening sequence, someone has gone and
implemented that and made sure that's
bit exact on one disc that existed at
one time of one little
sequence in the game.
- And then funnily, there was a... At
one VideoLAN conference, we made a
competition to make the weirdest
and most horrible file ever
... and see if VLC could play it.
- What did it end up being? What's the file?
- It was an MKV file made by Derek-
... which each of the frame was
changing resolution, aspect
ratio- ... rotation and it was like-
- Did it work?
- Yes. And there was another one where
the whole video was actually animated
subtitles, right? SSA, right? So-
- Yeah. I remember that, yeah
- ... each, this one was-
And so each frame was a black frame,
but on top of that there was a,
a subtitle that was
animated for each frame.
- There was a file that's a valid ZIP and a valid
MP3 at the same time or something like that,
so.
- So yeah, we'd made a
competition of stupid files.
- And it worked. It opened
all of the stupid files.
- Yes.
- By the way,
For people who are not familiar, I am
wearing a hat. Would it be fair to say this
is the best worst logo
of all time, the cone?
- Yeah, by far, right? The logo
of VLC is so iconic, right?
Like we are a team with a small
number of people and the icon
is known everywhere. I go to
middle of nowhere in India or in
China, people know the
cone, right? And 25% of
the website traffic that
comes to our main website is
cone player, right? So, so many people don't
know VLC, right? They know the cone player.
- That's the thing they
Google for is cone player.
- Yeah. They go on Google and they put cone
player and they download VLC, right?
So that's iconic. And once we tried to
change it as a joke, right? We said
it was going to be a type of uh,
caterpillar construction and
we said that during April 1st-
... and we had around 10,000 emails saying,
"No, don't change the logo," and so on, right?
So it's so iconic, right? It's so
distinctive, right? If you want to do a
video player, you're going to put a play
button on a TV, right? And that's a YouTube,
YouTube logo, right? It's unoriginal.
This one is orange, right?
- Yeah.
- It's very bright and it's weird.
- And it's ridiculous and it's absurd and it's
hilarious. It becomes meme and meme becomes
culture. Yeah.
- And you keep it and you know about it
and you know that in 20 years, like you
still have, going to have the cones and
remember, oh yeah, that was a video player.
- Yeah. And we'll talk about, you
know, the mission of FFmpeg being
a kinda the archival aspect of it. So
you can think about 1,000 years from
now we'll have all these videos
that only VLC can open. Humans,
human civilization has already
destroyed itself multiple times and the
only thing that will remain is this
like, you know, the cockroaches will be
crawling around and it'll be the VLC
logo- ... with some of the archival
footage that VLC can open. And the
aliens will show up and they'll press
play and they'll get to see it all 'cause-
- Well, really, really hope so, right? But there is also so
many memes where people say, "Well, I'm sure I can put
a pancake inside my DVD drive
and VLC will play it." Like-
- Can they?
- No, we tried. It doesn't. Um-
- Doesn't.
- ... but we actually have a video
of us trying that. Didn't work.
- A codec for physical reality, I don't
know what that would even look like.
- There was a guy who did that, right?
He printed a small cone, right?
Like the ones we distribute as
goodies and inside he put an
RFID chip which was his way of
playing a movie, right? And so he-
... put this on a RFID player and when
he put that it was playing like The
Last Star Wars and so on. So instead
of having like DVD boxes, he had like
VLC cones all around and he plugged that
and that was like physical objects.
- So the thing that we're talking
about is everything around video
codecs, video encoding, video
decoding, video streaming, video
player client that I'm wearing
on my head, the entire
ecosystem enabling free media.
We'll talk about FFmpeg, we'll talk
about VideoLAN, VLC and all
the other incredible video
technology that is used probably
by billions of people. So JB,
you're the lead developer behind
the legendary VLC player.
Kieran, amongst many other things, you're
lead developer behind the legendary
FFmpeg handle on Twitter. And both of
you have spicy opinions I would say.
So today we wanna talk
about FFmpeg and VLC.
For context for people who
are not aware and I'm sure
basically everybody listening
to this have used these two
technologies probably
regularly without knowing it.
So FFmpeg underlies basically
most video on the internet
including YouTube, Netflix,
Chrome, Firefox, of course
VLC and countless other
video platforms. It
is estimated that over 90% of video
processing workflows online and
offline involve FFmpeg. VLC has been
downloaded at least 6.5 billion times. But
likely that number, 'cause it's
impossible to really count the number
is much higher than that.
Virtually any operating system
supports virtually any media format.
The limitation being it
can't open pancakes. So,
Can we just lay out some of
the basics to help people
understand what's involved in
all of this? So when we press
play on a video player like
VLC, what happens? What--
How does it go from the
file or the stream to the
pixels on the screen and the sound
on the speaker? What are the big
stages to be aware of?
- So there are several stages, right?
The first stage is to get from
an address, right, which
is the type of URL, to
give you a byte of streams, right?
So this would be, for example, HTTP,
file, DVD, right? You give the
path to the media, and it gives
you a stream of data.
- The stream needs to be cut up by what's
known as the container, the demultiplexer or
demux. We'll try and keep the jargon
light throughout this, but it
needs to go and start demarcating video and
audio frames. So it just gets data from the
operating system blocks at a time and
needs to start cutting these frames up
into compressed data. It then
needs to start doing simple
parsing of the video frames- ... mainly
to figure out whether that codec is GPU
decodable or needs to fall back
to software. We're very sort
of used to assuming the GPU will play all
of these things. There'll be hardware
acceleration. I think it's up to forty-
five percent of files are not GPU
decodable. So these need to be probed.
They need to be detected. There can
be variants of a given codec, some
of which are decodable on the
GPU. Different vendors of GPU
might have different capabilities,
so those need to be detected. So if
it's GPU capable, you pass it through
to the GPU black box. So now if
there's a software fallback,
that means in the beginning
is to first do deentropy
coding, so removing the mathematical
coding of the bit stream. So this
uses capabilities such as
Huffman coding or arithmetic
coding to actually decompress the
mathematical layer of the bit stream.
We then need to start reading the syntax
elements for intra prediction. So intra
prediction are like still images
of the video, so your I-frames.
So this works and operates in the spatial domain.
So you do your intra prediction in spatial
domain. You have a residual because
your prediction isn't quite
matching that of reality. So you've made a
prediction, but then there's a little bit
left, and that's what's known as the
residual. This is stored in the frequency
domain, and these are quantized
to decompact their space.
We then need to do the inverse
transform to bring them back to the
spatial domain and apply these residuals.
- So a lot of the process of the
decoding is this thing is compressed.
And you have to predict the
highest quality thing that's
supposed to go there. I-frame- ... is the
best representation you have spatially.
And then there's a lot of temporal
compression that can happen
depending on the codec, and then you're
predicting. You're predicting what
the reality that was captured
in this rawest form.
- Yeah, because what people don't
realize is that the compression on
video and audio is
one hundred times, right? Like, people
don't realize how compressed we, we
do, right? For audio, you move,
you compress by, when you go from
normal audio to MP3, you compress
by ten times, right? When, when you
move to video, you need one hundred times,
two hundred times, right? So you need
to remove all the details,
but that you don't care about
because all the compressions that we do, and
that's very important, people forget about
that, is to be viewed by humans, right?
So all the codecs, either for
audio, mimic basically how your
ear works, right? And a lot
of things about, like, the
response on the ear and same for
your eyes, right? And so, for
example, on video, we don't work
on RGB, right? Everyone expects
to work in RGB. We don't,
right? We move to YUV, which is
basically one is luminance,
brightness, and the other are colors.
And this matches your eyes, where inside your
eyes you have the cones and the buttons, right?
With some of them look on brightness and
more on, on the other on colors, right? So
we need to compress a lot, and so
we need to degrade. But in order to
degrade, we need to match the human
perception, and this is why it's so
difficult. And then we need
to use the maximum power,
mathematical power, very complex
technologies. We move to the
frequency domain, as Kieran
said. We do a ton of
dequantizing, in order to get the best
compression, but it still looks good.
- You're trying to compress in
order to maximize the highest
quality thing for human perception.
- That is correct. And this is very
important, right? Compression is not like
a ZIP, right? A ZIP, you have
data in, you get data out,
right? And you try with all the
ZIP compression to arrive with
the limit. Here we are degrading
the signal, right? And so we
need to degrade both the audio and
the video signal in the best way
possible. And we can do that,
but it involves, first,
a lot of theoretical knowledge
about how the eye works, but
it, a lot of mathematical change,
a lot of mathematical tricks,
right? For example, when you
move to RGB and you do go to
YUV, for example, what
we do very often is that
we scale down the resolution of the
color compared to the brightness.
And most of the time, just
this without compression, it
divides the size by two, but
most people don't see it,
right? And so on and so
on, right? And then you go
to very complex mathematical
change. So of course
Fourier transforms, which de facto are
not Fourier transforms, they are like
discrete cosine transform, but that's
the same idea. So frequency domain
we split the video by blocks,
right? So that's why when it's
wrongly decoded, you see those blocks
and badly encoded, you see those blocks,
and so on, to arrive to
compression states that are
insanely high, right? And each generation
of the codec is like thirty percent less-
... for the same quality, right?
And this requires amount of
power of computational power that is huge.
- No, no, but you should elaborate. It's
thirty percent better, but an order of
magnitude, perhaps, perhaps even
two orders of magnitude more
compression power. That's
the big difference.
- What do you mean by compression power?
- Sorry, CPU power to achieve
that level of compression.
- Oh, yeah. So you have to be able to
leverage the CPU and sometimes GPU, like
you mentioned. And then we should
mention that a lot of this
programming is done at
the lowest possible-
... stack, whether it's C and
of course, as the legendary—
... Twitter handle re-emphasizes
over and over, a lot of assembly.
- So what happens globally is that you
have an address, right? Which gives you
with the operating system, a stream of bytes, a
stream of data, right? And this is the first step.
And the second step arises with demuxing,
where you're going to separate audio,
video, subtitle in type of different
tracks. And then on each of those
tracks, you're going to decompress
them, decode them, either audio with an
audio codec, video to video codec,
and subtitle to subtitle codec.
And once you've decompressed those
type of things, you have raw images,
raw, and then you're going to talk with
your graphics card and your screen and
display that. And same for the audio, you're
going to talk to your audio card, which
then is going to go in analog
to your audio speakers.
- And everything we've just said
in the past couple of minutes,
every sentence is someone's lifetime's
work. There are books about-
... every sentence. So
the level of complexity
in many cases is inordinate. You
know, it's, it's... Every sentence
has thousands of people working on this-
... in industry as a
whole, books written about
it. So there's a lot of detail,
there's a lot of subtleties, there's a
lot of both academic and practical
realities, both of which matter.
- Uh, we mentioned codecs, but I don't
think you mentioned containers.
So what, what are the actual containers
for some of the stuff we're talking
about? So people are familiar with MP4,
uh, MOV, MKV. So anyway, what are containers
versus the thing that goes inside?
- So the container is what we call also the
muxer, right? When I say demuxing, it
means decontainerizing, right?
So actually, if you look,
mux means multiplexer and
demultiplexer, right?
Mux and demux are those. And same, a
codec is actually coder, decoder, right?
Um, and so containers are this collection
of multiple tracks, right? So it's
a, what normal people call the file
format, but it's a bit
more, um, subtle than that.
But the most known one, of course,
is MP4, but when I started,
it was AVI, right? AVI was
the, the video format from-
... from Microsoft, and
MOV, M-O-V, which became
MP4, was a format from Apple.
In the open source community
one of the person that is still active on
VideoLAN is called Steve Lhomme and started,
This Matroska format, which is,
like, a bit more complex and
more future-proof. And
there are so many others.
- So, I mean, there's a, it's a pretty common
thing, and maybe it'll even happen in
this conversation, that
people confuse container
and the codec, right? So
confuse MP4 and H.264, for
example. Is that a horrible violation?
- No, it's not, because technically the
name of H.264 is MPEG-4 Part 10. Because
MPEG-4 is actually a meta
specification which has
several things in it,
right? There is the Part 2.
so there is, like, audio codecs,
right? AAC de facto is MP4 audio-
... something. There are actually
several video codecs, right, inside the
MPEG-4 specification. One
of them is MPEG-4 Part 10,
called also AVC, called
also H.264. Right? So
it's completely the fault of the
industry to make things difficult
to understand. So that's very
difficult so that people
then don't understand why sometimes
you talk about MPEG-4 Part 10,
where you mean H.264,
and why it's not MP4.
- So you can technically shove in all
kinds of different codecs inside
containers and horribly so.
- But broadly speaking, though,
MP4 is understood to generally
be H.264 plus AAC audio. 99% of
the time that's that, and that,
the rest are de minimis, the small effects, you
know, edge effects really compared to that.
So it's not the end of the
world. There, there are people
who do get annoyed by that. But also in
reality, something like VLC, just to point out,
the file may say .MP4, but it may be
something completely different, and that's
one of the challenges both FFmpeg
and VLC have is the real world is a
completely different place to
a three- letter file format.
- And this is very important to say, right?
Like, for example, in VLC and in FFmpeg,
we discard the file format, right? We look
into the file to understand
what's in it because so many
people, like, they say, "Oh, it's a video,
it should must be MP4," but technically it's
an MOV or maybe it's a MKV, right? So we
analyze in real time everything that we
have, and we don't trust- ... the format.
- So what information does the
fact that it's .MP4 give you?
- It helps, right? It gives you a
hint, right? Just like, oh, it's
finished by .MP4. I will
start first by opening,
probing it with the MP4 container demuxer
to see, well, it should be that. But I don't
trust it, and if I'm lost, I say, "Okay,
maybe I'm going to try it." So it
bumps the priority of the module.
- So how do you get to... just to
take a bit of a tangent there.
You know, the dumb thing
is if you try the MP4,
but it turns out it's a different
codec than you would have expected,
Most players just break there.
- Yes.
- And so how do you not break? There's
just philosophically, I'm sure
there's a bunch of stumbling
blocks along the way where it's
easy to just break and stop, freak
out. That's it. How does VLC not?
- This is why VLC is popular.
But the reason is because
actually VLC was, is just
a client of a streaming
solution called VideoLAN
from a very long time
ago, from the late '90s. And
when you're playing video
which are on UDP, right, in network,
they might be damaged, right?
So you don't trust your inputs, and this is
very important into the security is that you
don't trust your inputs. So everything in
VLC is prepared to work with broken files.
And it's a philosophical idea from
the beginning, and everything
is engineered into that. And
it's a culture, right? And so,
for example... And VLC became very popular
on that because a long time ago when people
were pirating content which
they do a lot less today-
- And none of us ever have-
- No, of course not. Um— ... the metadata
to play some files like AVI is at,
at the end of the file, right? And when you're
downloading, you don't have that, right?
So VLC was just like, "Hey, this file is
broken, but I'm still going to try to
interpret it," and this was very useful.
- We hinted at the awesomeness of
the various different stages.
We hinted at the awesomeness of codecs, the
depth and the richness and the complexity
of everything involved there.
What— Let's try to define
what is a video codec? What's
involved there? What does it mean to
compress something? You
already started to hint at it—
... but can we elaborate
a little bit more?
- So there's a huge amount of
redundancy in any video both
spatial and temporal, and the point
of any video codec is to remove
this redundant data, use mathematical
properties as part of this reduction
process. So more often than not, using
several orders of magnitude more
compute to compress because that's
more costly versus both costly
both financially and in CPU resources—
... versus the decompression. So
it's asymmetric in that respect. Uh,
often the case because compression is done
once, but there could be lots of viewers of
another file. So to take that
information and compress it by
100x, 200x, removing
redundant information and
using mathematical properties to make
that small, but also have properties
such as error resilience.
So as, as JB suggested,
VLC in the beginning was, was used
to play UDP network feeds, and UDP
network feeds lose packets. And
so some of the design goals of a
codec is also to be recoverable.
You need to actually be able to join a stream.
It's not necessarily a file. You need to join,
get on the decoding process,
and start decoding.
- And, and to give a more image to people
who are not familiar, right? Like, when
you're going to see any type of movie, right?
You're going to see the camera is
going to pan, right, and travel. And
you realize that, for example, all the
background is the same from, for, like,
a minute, right? Or—
... thirty seconds, right? So you can
reuse the cloud that you see uh, on
the background, you can reuse that
from a frame to another, right?
And so it's, gets the more, the more
memory you have, the more power, the more
comparisons you can make, right? And so
the more compressed you can be.
And most of the modern codecs are
basically doing that.
- So just to make it even more explicit.
So what is video? Video is a
bunch of pixels often RGB.
You have three values, and you have
a grid of pixels, and you have,
let's say, twenty-four or thirty or sixty,
frames a second, and you
just have all these pixels
repeating and showing different stuff-
... thirty times a second. And so
the question, the philosophical,
the technical question is, how
can I compress all of that,
store all of that at 100x?
- Yep. Or 1,000x, right?
- 1,000x.
- The target is 1,000x, right?
- And the goal is when you say redundancy,
what is redundant? Meaning stuff at best
that humans wouldn't
notice if it was missing.
- So for example, you have a picture
of a cloud, right? And from the
next frame, they're still going to be the same cloud,
so it's redundant. You could just put it once and
not do it, right? Or you have a
black background behind me, for
example. The black is the same on the whole
picture, right? So you can say, "Well, you know, in
this picture, take the pixels that
you have on the top left and the one
on the top right. I'm not going to give the value.
I'm just going to tell you it's the same at the top
left." And then you can
say for frame one reuse
something from the previous frame or the
previous, previous frame, and so on and
so on, right? So you
could... Basically, it's
unlimited, but then it's limited
in terms of memory or in terms
of compute power. Because, for
example, if you need to compare pixels
on two hundred frames in the past on 4K
resolutions, it's a huge amount of compute.
- And then when you're showing it, you have
to do the decompress of all of that.
So is it the codec, the, has the
encoding and the decoding is a coupled
process that you're developing?
- Yes, exactly, right. And
those are two different
trade-offs, right? Are you going to
compress more? But then it might be
more difficult to decode. Are you going to
comp- to make it a codec that is
more complex to encode and easier to
decode? Are you going to make a codec that
is easier to encode because you need to be
fast, but then the, the client side,
the, the player is going to spend more
time? That's why you have so many
different type of codecs, is that it's not
always easy. And to make it even
more complex, modern codecs
like AV1, AV2, or VVC are
actually not codecs. They are
a collection of tools, right?
There are multiple tools, multiple
codecs in the same codec to, depending
on the image, get the more compression.
- So just to elaborate, codecs like AV1, VVC
have a much wider, have a wide
audience. It could be a screen share
content, it could be video, it
could be animation. All of these
require different coding tools. So
what happens these days is a collection
of tools are put in and called
AV1 and called AV2, called VVC
to allow for different use
cases. So you may be on Zoom
and sharing your PowerPoint,
and then you need to show the
audience a video. That codec needs to
start changing its tool set depending on
the content to compress in a different way.
- And like you said, there's a bunch of
incredible engineers behind each part of
that, each part of the tools
that make up AV1, for example.
Uh, so we've kind of danced
around it. We talked about VLC,
the logo, the hat. Let's talk about
FFmpeg. What, what is FFmpeg exactly?
- FFmpeg is basically the low-level
libraries for codecs, so compressions
and decompression, muxers and
demuxers, and filters. It's—
The core is this, and then you have
several tools which allow you to create a
type of pipeline to process
any type of video files.
And it's used as a
library absolutely inside
everything from VLC to
Chrome to your smart TVs, to
basically any video that you
see online you usually use
FFmpeg. And FFmpeg in it has all those
type of tools, and sometimes
depend on other libraries like
x264, libvpx, and others, right? So it's
really now the de facto tool to process
images.
- From a philosophical level, I think
it's incredible that your home
videos, your grandmother's home videos
and trillion-dollar corporations
effectively are on a level playing
field using the same technology stack.
It's— it wouldn't be a surprise, you
know, these big companies just have three
thousand-line FFmpeg commands.
There are some that use the API, but there
are some that just have long command lines.
- So yeah, there's a bunch of tools,
like literally command line tool,
FFmpeg, of course, FFprobe. There's libraries,
libavcodec, libavformat, libavfilter.
But the FFmpeg on the command line—
is, like, legendary because you
can cut— Like, there's so many
parameters. You can customize
everything to hell.
- It's a language. It's an actual language.
- It's an actual— yeah, you could think
of it as a programming language.
- Yeah, of course, I'm sure. Because— so most
of the people, they're going to take FFmpeg,
file in, file out, and specify the
format, right? But you can-- We've seen
thousands of characters, and we've
seen also, like, people, like, doing
programming generation of command lines
to make FFmpeg. There is a ton of
people who are using AI to generate
command lines for FFmpeg because you have no
idea what it is. But you can do- specify so
many filters right on the
command line, right? So
FFmpeg is this collection of toolbox for
multimedia processing that everyone uses.
And everyone that is watching your videos
is also using it, right? You're on
YouTube. Well, it's FFmpeg on
the client side. Well, the your
server side, on the server side. The client
side is probably Chrome. Well, you're using
FFmpeg also.
And you're using OBS to record. Well,
it's FFmpeg, right? You're using a ton
of important, like, big box,
professional boxes. Well, it's very
possible that inside some
part of FFmpeg is running.
- I mean, there's like so many, just
to give people an idea, like I use
FFmpeg a lot on, on everything.
Just trivial stuff like,
Take a video, add an
intro video and an outro
video, and fade one into
the other like what is it
called? Dip to black, like
where it dips and then shows
the next video and does the
same thing with audio. There's
like a cross dissolve of the audio.
It's quiet, it quiets the audio and
makes it loud again. And then
there's a bunch of stuff like
showing the captions on
screen card, like baking the
captions in. You can customize the font.
You can do all kinds of layering
of audio and video. There's a
million things and of
course, all of that works
like magically with basically any codec.
Like anything you can shove in on the
audio and the video side, it works.
- But it's like if you look at, for example,
you can do things that you would
do with Adobe After Effects-
... in command line on FFmpeg, right? It's,
and it's very interesting because, for
example, for imaging,
there is not such tool.
There is a few tools, but not
with the breadth of FFmpeg.
- So ImageMagick has a similar kind of-
- Yes, but you will not-
- ... spirit, but it-
- ... do some filters, complex filters. You
don't have the equivalent of Photoshop-
in command line, right? But for video,
you have FFmpeg in command line.
- Yeah. It's incredible. I mean, it's
like an example of a thing when a
bunch of great people get together
and they get a vision, and they
stick by that vision for many
years, which is incredible.
- And the vision behind, and the
same for VLC and FFmpeg, is that
we make everything that is very
complex easy to use for the normal
people, for everyone.
Right? Our goal is to make something
that is insanely complex technically
and make it easy to use, right?
And people, they use VLC, they
drop a file. They don't realize
how complex the file is, but they
play it. Or, or people put any
type of thing inside FFmpeg with
complex filters, and it just works
like magically, right? And people-
And this is our mission, right?
Make very complex things.
- We wouldn't be here and you
wouldn't be here if this
required, you know, a traditional
television studio setup.
It's tools like FFmpeg that
democratize this. The podcast and
streaming revolution,
the YouTube revolution-
was caused. You know, FFmpeg was
a big player in that because it
democratized this technology that was once
in the nineties, for example, you needed
equipment that cost hundreds of thousands of dollars
to do compression. It was the size of a car,
and now everybody has that at almost
an exact level playing field, and
that's something that's so remarkable.
- It gave voice to a lot of people.
And just to clarify, we say you,
you wouldn't be here, not
the human, but the podcast.
- The podcast. Oh, sorry. You as a... Sorry.
- I would still... VLC did not have
anything to do on a biological
level- ... at creating me as a human.
- But, but it's like you realize also
everything moved from text to images
and images to video, right?
Look at social networks. Video
is everywhere. It's the most
powerful medium there is,
right? And when you see
shorts and, and in Reels
and in TikTok, right? It's
amazingly powerful to
give... Video is amazing for
that, right? But the
complexity is important.
- This is what people don't realize.
I mean, this is really it
gave power to the individual all
across the world. That's real
freedom. And I think, I can't believe
it, but we still haven't mentioned the
actual obvious thing for people
who are not familiar, which
it's open source, and
there's a open source
community of users and
developers behind it. So
it's really, it's a movement. So,
like, we'll talk a bunch in a
bunch of different ways about the community
behind it. But can you speak to the open
source element? So when we say what is
FFmpeg, it's an open source project.
- Yeah. So FFmpeg, VLC,
x264, VideoLAN, everything
we do is fully open source. And for the
people who don't understand how open
source is, my usual analogy is about
a chocolate cheesecake, right? Um,
usually for you, when you want to buy your
cheesecake, you go to a bakery, they give you the
cheesecake. The other one way of
having a cheesecake is have your
grandma give you a recipe of how to
make that. When we do open source,
we give you the chocolate cake,
and we give you the recipe to
actually remake the same cake,
but at the same time tell you how
to build the oven and also
how you're allowed to modify
the recipe and resell it to someone else.
And this is because software is
just a very long recipe of small
instruction. Computers are not
very clever. They go very, very
fast. So a normal program has
tens of billions of instructions
instead of the tens when you
have your chocolate recipe. So
a lot of the software industry was
about selling software, like where you
just have like the final
cheesecake. In open source, we
give you everything, and
that managed to get a
lot of people work together, right? Because
then you decide that you're going to
make the best program, the best
recipe for video, and you create
communities. In FFmpeg, since the
beginning of FFmpeg, probably
two thousand to three thousand-
- In the thousands, yeah
- ... people have contributed from the beginning,
right? And then it's exactly like the
Linux kernel, right? The Linux kernel
has probably ten thousand people
contributing everywhere, and
they get together, well,
mostly online, right? So they
virtually get together to create the
best tool for something. And on
FFmpeg and VLC, it's just like,
well, this codec doesn't work, so I'm
going to work on the codec, and I'm going
to add the support for this file
inside FFmpeg, so it will be
beneficial to everyone. Because again, we
work for the greater good. We work for
everyone, and that is what open source is.
- And we should mention,
depending on the licensing,
You could probably build a billion-dollar,
maybe even a trillion-dollar company
around basic... as a wrapper to...
- Well, yes- ... people do.
People do, right? There was a
lot of problems with mostly,
Cloud providers who are basically
running some open source tools,
In the cloud and just give you the API to
access to that. And there was a lot of um,
databases like Mongo or Elastic
who changed their license in order
to avoid those type of scenarios.
- This is a question we get a lot in
FFmpeg is, "Why don't you do that?"
And you can't. We have, we have thousands of
contributors, some of whom aren't even alive anymore.
It would need all of their agreement to
do that, and JB will go maybe a bit later
and talk about how challenging that
process was in VLC to do the re-licensing.
- The license is a social contract
in terms of Rousseau de
facto of the community. The community does
not agree on much beside
the license. People go
around, discuss around because
of the license, and that
also allow those license fork, right?
Sometimes the community splits, but
it's possible because of the
license and to merge back.
And we've seen that so many
times, right? GCC and GC,
And EGCS in the past. We have
seen, for example, all the web
browsers, right? They started as web,
like KHTML, which becomes WebKit and
then which becomes Blink,
right? So open source
license is like the core of the community
and people are coming from all around the
world, very different type of religion,
Political borders. They work
in the same way on a project
to solve a specific problem,
and the specific problem we're working on
is to make multimedia easy for everyone.
- Uh, looking it up on Perplexity here, looking
at the different open source licenses.
Most major open source licenses
fall into two buckets:
permissive, very few conditions,
and copyleft, share-alike
requirements for derivatives. Below
is a brief practical summary of the
main ones you'll see in the wild. MIT
license, BSD, ISC, Apache, GNU GPL, GNU AGPL.
Where's LGPL? Yeah, LGPL. Let's see.
There's the Mozilla Public License.
There's Eclipse Public License. It
goes on. There's a lot of variety.
I mean, I think the really popular
ones is MIT, GPL, LGPL-
- Yeah. And BSD. BSD
- ... and BSD, Apache. Sometimes you'll see-
- Apache as well
- ... Apache. Unlicense, that's an option. Attempts to
dedicate code to the public domain with a fallback
permissive license.
- There are many licenses for many different
things. What people don't understand
that public domain is something that
doesn't exist worldwide, right?
So it's all the open source licensing
use the copyright law, right, the
international copyright law, in order
to give rights on how you
use the software or how you
modify. It's de facto a copyright license
contract that you give to the end
user or to the developer. And
so you have like the first one, which
are basically very permissive, MIT, BSD.
You give the code and basically
you do whatever you want, right?
You take it, you want, you modify,
you do what you want. And this
is popular for JavaScript and the
type of BSD operating system.
- So some of them, one of the parameters
is whether they require attribution,
meaning if you use the
code, you have to say-
- Yes. So in those types of permissive
licenses, some you need to say if you
use it, which is called attribution,
and some you don't. And then there is
the other part of license
which are copyleft,
where you need to give
back to the community your
modifications and with
different strings attached.
some weak copyleft license,
like the Mozilla Public
License, to some which
are a bit stronger like a
GPL, or even very strong
like AGPL. So all of
those are different types of
licensing that depends on what
your goals are and how you want to structure
your community, which is why I spoke about
social contract, because this is
very important to understand.
FFmpeg and VLC are mostly GPL or
LGPL. The Linux kernel is GPL
but Android is Apache. A ton of JavaScript
frameworks that are using are mostly MIT.
All the BSD kernels, OpenBSD, NetBSD
are of course BSD. And so it's
philosophical change on how you want
people to contribute back- ... basically.
- So I think you talked about that,
you've moved at one point from GPL to
LGPL on certain parts of the project.
What... Can you describe the difference
between the two, and what does it take to
move to, I guess, a more permissive...
So that direction is more permissive.
LGPL is more permissive than GPL.
- Yeah. So you have to realize
that you can always go from
more permissive to less permissive,
right? Because of course,
those licenses are basically
statements, and so if you restrict,
you can always restrict more, right?
So in a GPL project, you can take
MIT code, but you cannot do the
opposite, right? Because they are more
constrained to match. Indeed,
in fact, I changed the core
of libVLC, which is the engine
of VLC- ... from GPL to LGPL.
And there were two reasons to do that.
The first one is that so people can
use the VLC engine, libVLC, into
third-party applications. So a lot of
applications which are playing video
on your phone or on your tablet
are actually VLC engine in it-
... which is calling FFmpeg
in it. Um, so that was
one of the ways to create one of the companies
I created, which is doing consulting
and integration of those types of
applications where you integrate VLC
into third-party solutions
like inside game engines or
stuff like that. With GPL, you couldn't do that
because that means you needed to open source
everything, and those are for a lot of,
like, commercial companies who don't want
that.
- So you can create a company with LGPL,
you can create a company around it.
- Yes.
- You can do a commercial thing.
You don't have to open source it.
So that's a big, big leap.
- So you could play video in your game.
- Yes.
- The problem is I'm a game developer,
and I want to play some videos-
... and I don't want to be forced to open source
the entire game just to play those videos.
So that's where the consulting
business, the libVLC LGPL-
... allows you to do that. The LGPL,
the library GPL as it used to be known,
allows you to do that.
- And FFmpeg is exactly the
same. It force... LGPL
forces you to give back what you
change on this component, this-
... library, which is
why it's library GPL.
And so you can use FFmpeg
as LGPL into, like,
any type of application, even non-open
source, but you need to give back the
modification you did on
FFmpeg. Same on libVLC.
- Is it limiting from an open
source perspective to go GPL?
Because if you-- if your library, if
your code is GPL, it means you're not...
You're basically discouraging
companies from building a business-
- Yes
- ... around it, right? Is
that, is that fair to say?
- It depends on the company, but the
company whose business model requires
the source, the application to be
closed source, yes, it's limited.
So that's why, for example, I moved
to LGPL. The second reason is a,
a bit more obscure, is that the
terms and conditions of the,
App Store, the Apple App
Store for iOS makes it very
complex to have GPL application
on it, while it's easier to have
LGPL applications on it. So
VLC on Windows and on Mac,
And on Linux is GPL. The core is LGPL.
But on iOS the iPhone
version and the Apple TV
version is a type of different
license called the MPL.
And yes, I went and changed the
license and it was a long story.
- Yeah. So I think basically to change
the license you have to contact all the
contributors.
- Yes. It's very important to
understand that open source
projects are what we call
in the US copyright law
joint work, or in civil law collective
works or collaborative
works, is that you work all
together in terms of the same goal, and then
you create one software, which is one release.
But the copyright is kept
by all the individuals.
Some open source projects don't do that. They force
copyright assignment, but this is not what we do.
We're communities. So everyone
has basically copyright on what
they changed. And this
copyright stays even
if at the end your contribution
was deleted because the new
contribution was based on your previous
one, right? So if you want to properly
re-license, you need to find all the
contributors. And at that time, I
had to contact more than three
hundred and fifty people. And
sometimes, well, they're just an email, right?
So it's... you need to actually track down.
I actually, like, travel to
some place to go someone that I
was like, sorry, that I'd
found online to see a-- to
go to their job and say, "Well, you
licensed that. Can you-- do you
want to change from GPL to LGPL?" Most of the
times they don't even care. They wanted to
help VLC. But also it brought
me to very complex situation. I
arrived to the work of a person
who was a factory worker.
Um, and I said, "Well, I
need to you to sign that,"
because it was his son who died who
actually wrote the code, right?
So I had to explain all those
type of open source meaning,
and no, I was not a company trying
to rip out the two line or five
line that that guy did-
... but was useful, and the whole
community agreed on that, and he had
no idea I was a factory worker. This com--
And I was a lot younger, right? Like
it was fourteen years
ago, and like, like I was
almost in tears, right? It's very difficult,
right? We are talking about lives of people and
he explaining, and we went talk
about the photo of this guy, right?
So it's important to do it
right and to do it correctly.
But yes, that means tracking down everything
because every contribution works.
There are some project who don't respect
that, and we do re-licensing a bit, like,
aggressively.
But as I said, it destroyed the whole
heart of the community because it's-- we
only agree on the, on the
license, so that's important.
- I would emphasize the community is
such a wide-ranging group of people.
There's people in the Syrian war zone
with electricity part-time. There's,
there's all people from all walks of life-
... rich, poor, young, old. So
it's quite remarkable to get,
you know, a group of people aligned
on something. And that's an
achievement in itself.
- Yeah. It's incredible. And a lot
of them are introverts, so you
coming to find them and getting them and
getting them to answer an email might
be quite difficult.
- Most of us are introverts, right? You
need to be more precise. You have
extremely introverts, extremely, extremely
introverts and introverts, right?
It's just like a whole spectrum of
different people. It doesn't matter. The
important is, is your code good?
Is your code great? Is your technology
great? We care about excellent code.
We don't care who you are. Sorry, it's
just like we have no idea to check.
We cannot check, right? Like, maybe
you're a dog. I don't care, right?
I don't care where you come from. I
need to look at your code. And this is
important because people don't understand that,
and they come to the community and send them some
patches, and they get rejected,
and they don't like that because,
I mean, you're just like, "Sorry, it's not
up to our standards." "Oh, yeah, but I'm
engineer at this very large
company in Italy, in Germany,
in the US." We don't care. We care
about the quality of your code
because this is what defines our
community, and which means that we have a
lot of people who contribute who are
some very different backgrounds and,
and very introverts, sure.
But that's okay, right?
- So one of the legends of
the community is of course,
Linus Torvalds, who created Linux and is
a longtime maintainer of
the Linux kernel. As the
legend goes, he can be pretty harsh
on this meritocratic process of
reviewing the code and saying it's
not good enough. Can you just speak
to the legend of Linus Torvalds?
- Linus is one of a kind, right? And
I would even go and say that what he did
on Git is more interesting than what he
did on the Linux kernel.
He's very harsh, but what people
don't see is usually when he's
harsh to, it's people who are
maintainer of part of the
kernel, right? So they know him,
right? So he's not very harsh like
that to everyone. The thing is,
what he created in his room
is basically powering every
server online, right? Even
at Microsoft cloud called Azure,
I'm quite sure seventy, eighty
percent of the servers are running Linux.
All your Android phones are running
Linux. What he did with the
power of open source, sure,
is amazing. And yes, the
quality of the Linux
kernel is very high, and
yes, it's difficult, but
we cannot compromise on that.
We cannot compromise on quality
because in the end, and you have
to understand that, is the core
community of VLC is five people. The core
community of FFmpeg is ten to fifteen,
and we are the ones who are going
to maintain your code, right?
Because one thousand contributors in
the timeline and just ten staying, it's
one percent chance that someone
comes and stays. One percent.
So you will have change of job, change
of wives, you have children, you
have accident in life. You're going to
change jobs, whatever. You're not going to
come back. It's most likely. So we are
the one going to maintain your code.
It needs to be maintainable.
It needs to be excellent.
And yes, sometimes that means that you need
to rework your work because it was good, but
it's not excellent, and we need
excellence because we are very
few to maintain something that
is critical for the whole.
- But we should also mention that there is
some spiciness, some harshness to the
language that's sometimes used when you're
keeping this high bar of excellence.
Is there something to say to that?
- It's, it's true, right? It's also the
fact that, for example, what we're doing
is low level. It's extremely
technical. You get into this
community. The tone gets very like
a type of-- It's a subculture, right? So
people who arrive from the external are
basically not known to the
subculture. Most of those people
around FFmpeg and VLC, we do
VideoLAN DevDays, VDD every,
every year. They are so fun in
real life, and they love it.
But it's true that you're online
and sometimes, like, the tone, you
don't realize how it is. But that's okay.
- It's a culture. I mean, you get this in
the gaming culture. There's pretty harsh,
intense, the way people
communicate, and it's-- everyone
understands that the way you show love
and respect just looks different in
different communities. Sometimes
people... It depends. If it's a
book club, usually people are going to
be much sweeter. If it's an open source
project that's very high stakes
and used by millions of people-
- But it's very not often insults
that you see, for example,
in the gaming, right? And so
Linus' tone is a bit unusual
even for the open source community. It's
more like it's more harsh on the results,
saying, "No, this is not good. This is crap."
Those type of things that you will see.
- Try not to make it about the
person, make it about the code.
- Yes.
- It's very, very matter of fact, and I think
you've got to look at it in terms of, you know,
the famous FFmpeg is developed almost entirely
by volunteers, and that's true, and you've got
to imagine someone's done a hard day's
work at their day job. They come home.
You know, terseness might be a thing, you
know, it... And that's not something to take
personally.
- You're tired, you're busy, but you still
care about this open source stuff.
But you may not be able to explain and
handhold someone on every subtle detail.
- And also you have to
realize that most people don't
speak English as native language.
And this is especially for
open source projects like
FFmpeg and VLC, which are mostly
centered out of Europe. Sometimes like
people who are from the US
or, or just like are very
not happy about the tone, but most of the time
it's also like they don't know better, right?
It's difficult. The language is-- English
is a difficult language. There is so many
subtleties and tone and so on
that you don't have, right?
So often it's also difficult in
those type of community about like
different cultures and languages.
- So as the legend goes, JB, you repeatedly
turned down millions of dollars to keep
VLC open source free for
everyone without ads.
So take me through the reasoning
behind that decision of
leaving millions of dollars on the table.
- Yeah, that's like almost a
meme, right, on Reddit or-
- There literally is a meme on Reddit.
- 9GAG and yeah, yeah. See, there's-
- You looking like a wizard in the,
in the VLC hat on Reddit. This
is JB, the creator of VLC
media player. He refused
tens of millions of dollars in
order to keep VLC ads free.
Thanks, Jean-Baptiste Kempf. You
can even summon him on Reddit.
- Yeah. And usually if you see, right, it's
usually like people tag me, right? And,
and then there is me, and then
like I say, "Good morning."
I got twenty-four K upvotes, which is great,
right? My karma on Reddit is amazing,
at least on that account.
So the question is,
needs to be answered first, what is
the story about VLC, right? Because
yes, this is true, I refuse
dozens of millions of dollars, yes,
several times. Yes, I could be a
multimillionaire and be
somewhere on the beach. Um,
but I did not do it because
I thought it was not
moral and it was not the right thing
to do. And this is very important for
myself, is to be like,
I work for the greater
good, I work for people, and I don't
want-- It's not just by myself.
But the reason is also because
I did not feel that I'm
completely legitimate to do that,
and let me explain you why. VLC
story is a very weird story. In France,
we have university and we
have a type of top colleges
and those top of excellency
schools are engineering schools,
business schools, and
basically lawyers and medical,
right? But they're outside of
university, and in order to enter those,
you spend two years working
like crazy math, physics to
enter those best engineering schools.
One of the schools is called the École Centrale
Paris. It has changed name since, but it was
called the École Centrale Paris.
And because it was Centrale, they
had to move it because it was too small
after the World War II and, and they moved
it, they wanted to move it to the center of
France in a place called Clermont-Ferrand.
And the alumni decided that
this was not okay, right? It is
a, the school that Eiffel, right,
the, the one who did the Eiffel
Tower, attended to, right? So they said, "No,
no, we are amazing, great school. We cannot
do that." And so they bought a piece
of land south of Paris very near
Paris. And it was a campus managed
by a nonprofit of the alumni, okay?
Because of that, everything on the
campus was managed by students. The
university did nothing, right? So radio,
TV, supermarket, library defining who was
going into which rooms. Everything
was managed by the students.
- That's amazing. That's an amazing
experiment, that it all, all
didn't go to hell quickly.
It somehow flourished.
- It worked great, and I
learned so much in my life
doing those side activities, right? Because you're
twenty-two and you need to run your campus,
else you don't have electricity, right?
So you care about that, right?
But anyway, in the '80s they
did a full experiment of deploying
a network mostly sponsored
by IBM and 3Com, which
was a token ring network.
So token ring is something
that probably almost no one
knows about anymore. It's a
networking technology where
you don't have routers, right?
Everyone is linked. It's type, like
really a ring, and when you want to
send a message, you talk to your neighbor who's
going to put the message to the next one,
who's going to put the
things to the next one,
in terms of ring. The issue with token
ring is, of course, is that it's
very slow because every computer
on the network needs to
open the message, see if it's okay.
Is it for me? No, it's not, and
then send it back, like a token
which is traveling around the ring.
In the '80s, you're doing some
Telnet and sending mails as
university. That's okay,
right? But starts the '90s,
and the '90s and start video
games, and when you have high
latency in video games, basically you die,
right? So in nineteen ninety-four, nineteen
ninety-five, around Doom and Duke Nukem
coming around, they want a faster
network. So the students go and see
the university and say, "You know
what? We want a faster network. We
need to work," which, and also play
video games. And the university
tells them that basically,
"Oh, I'm sorry, we cannot help
you because you understand the
campus is not ours. You manage it, so
do something. And you should see
some basically partners of this
university and basically go
away." And they go, and they
actually go and see the CIO of
Bouygues, which is a large French
company and who's doing some
TVs in France. And he says,
"Well, you know what? The future
of video is satellite." Well, today
we know it's not, but at least it was
a good idea. In nineteen ninety-five, the
first satellite dish, and he says that
instead of having like one satellite
dish and a big decoder for
each of the students, which are one
thousand and five hundred, what about
you build, like you put
an enormous dish and
only one decoder, and you send the
video directly on the network.
And that required a very fast
network. Today, it's obvious, but at
the time was, like, the first to do video
streaming. So they built this project,
which was called Network 2000.
Of course, right, we are in the '90s, right?
Everything is- ... futuristic is called 2000,
like—
- Yeah, 2000, yeah.
- And so they do the Network 2000
project. It's completely hacked.
It crashes after 45 seconds. That's
okay. The demo is 40 seconds.
It leaks memory. That's okay. They put
64 megabytes of RAM instead of the
8 or 16 you have, and the demo should have
stopped there. And that was the Network
2000 project by the students.
- What was the format of the video
that they had to work with?
- MPEG-2 because satellite is
MPEG-2 TS for transport,
MPEG-2 video, and MPEG-2
audio at that time.
And the project should have stopped there.
Everyone was happy. They had, like,
amazing ATM network at 155 megabits per
second. They had probably one of the
best network in Europe at that time, and
they stopped the project. Six months or a
year later, two students arrive and say,
"Well, you know what? Maybe other
people care about video streamed on a
local network," and they
create the VideoLAN project,
VideoLAN. And one of them is called
Christophe Massiot, that is a good
friend of both Kieran and me, and
they start the project. It's not
even open source yet, and
they spend around three years
to get the school to agree to
make it open source. Because the
university wanted to get some--
because of the IP and copyright of
the students, wanted to basically
monetize these MPEG-2 decoders.
- Just to be clear, so what was the main
application, streaming on a local network?
- It was streaming on a local network.
- By the way, that's just, like, to state the
obvious. This is before YouTube. This is before-
- Ten years before YouTube. You
have a Pentium 60 or 75, right?
You, the main machine was
486DX at 33 megahertz, right?
- Bear in mind, television was the main
form of video at the time. You could
get new channels. In the '90s, having even
one new channel when you grew up with four
channels, having a fifth or a
sixth was a big deal, and so
having this satellite
service with, you know,
dozens, even hundreds of
channels was so groundbreaking.
- Especially because this is university where you
had a ton of different nationalities, right?
So there was a ton of people who wanted...
So the-- in the end, they had, like,
several dishes on different types of satellites,
right? Because, for example, a lot of people were
coming from the Maghreb or the
Middle East and they, so they went
to different types of satellites.
Anyway, the solution worked great,
and they started the VideoLAN project.
The VideoLAN project has several
and some are completely crazy
solutions, like one how to
create multicast on a unicast
network, but let's not come
to that. It's too, too complex. But
VideoLAN client part is what became VLC.
Actually, they basically strong-armed the
university to force it to open source
because university did not understand
that. And in 2001, it's still early.
But basically, yes, the
university agreed early 2001
to make it open source. I joined
the project in 2003 because that's
when I joined the university.
So the first thing is
I'm not the one who created VLC
because actually no one did, right?
- Just kind of naturally emerged from the VideoLAN
project. And we should mention that, like,
again, you said it just, but
to make it clear, VideoLAN,
As what it became was at the
time was a set of technologies
around video, and the VLC, what you
called the client, that's the thing
that most normies, uh-
- That is correct, and
- ... think of, like, as the thing, which is,
like, the thing that pops up when you click on a
video and you play it.
- So I arrive in 2003, and
then I will create the
open source nonprofit
organization called VideoLAN,
and I took everything out of the
university to create a nonprofit
project and something sustainable.
It's, yes, it's true that I spent
more time than anyone on VLC
and VideoLAN. That is sure.
but it's a continuity of a
previous project, VideoLAN, the
student project, which is a continuity
of the Network 2000 project, which is a
continuity of that and that.
- I'm sure there's moments along the
way there you were thinking of, like,
what is the future of this from an
open source perspective? 'Cause as,
as the internet is blowing up,
and there is companies... I
mean, for people who don't remember,
like, there's companies making
huge amounts of money.
- And I can tell you that in 2005,
the project should have died,
And I made it to continue the
project. At some point, we were
only two active developers.
and I thought it was great
technology and was useful,
and it will be useful and I
made that my life and my,
my time. And I made that grow from a
few hundreds of thousands of users,
millions of users to what we have
now, which is probably billions
of version of VLC around the
world and used everywhere. So
that's a bit the story of VLC. There
is ton of very funny stories around
that. Many people from
around the world working
on it, like you said, in Syria or
middle of nowhere in India. But
along the way, I got several
offers which were either to
bundle toolbars, right? You
remember those horrible toolbars-
... which were basically
spyware, or changing your web
browser or your search
engine or even, like,
advertisement inside VLC.
And I didn't like that,
right? I am-- and people don't
understand that. It's not-- I'm not
against money, right? I'm very happy
to make money. I created several
startups and one I hope that
is going to work very well.
It's the fact that I believe
that you need to win money
ethically. There is a right way
of doing that, and doing sneaky
advertisement or stealing data
is not the correct way, right?
For example, if Netflix arrived at some point
and say, "Well, we want to put Netflix inside
VLC," probably the story would have been
different, right? But they didn't. The only
people who came to us
were shady ads company.
And if I do that, right, I would have a
ton of money, right? And then three years
later, project is gone, right? Someone
forks it and something else happens.
- So it's not even necessarily ads or any
of that, it's the shadiness of the-
... dishonesty of the-- So you
had a good radar, you had a good
threshold of like, "No,
this compromises the
spirit of what this is
supposed to represent."
- But also it's for me, right?
I'm like very selfishly, I
need to go to bed at night and be happy
about what I've done, right? Maybe it's
my upbringing, maybe it's my parents'
fault or whatever, right? But
I believe there is right and wrong, right?
And this was the right
decision at the time.
It still is. I want to be
proud of what I've been doing.
And like, if I had sold out, I would have
betrayed so many other
people who work here.
- Yeah, well, I should say me
and most of the internet
thank you for that decision.
It's inspiring for others,
I think that are pushing the
open source movement forward,
that it's okay to do these
kinds of huge sacrifices
if you believe it's right. And I think in that
case it was right and it was the reason that VLC
became as successful as it was, 'cause
it's an embodiment, it's a symbol of
like, you know, freedom and what the
open source community can create.
- Yeah, and be a service for so many people
around the world, and this is important.
- We should emphasize in the 2000s it was
really normal to download a program and it
secretly installs some spyware. It was
buried in very faint text or in the
license text box that nobody
reads that at the bottom-
... "Oh, I will be
installing this toolbar-
... and changing all these things,"
and it was very common to have to, you
know, you install a program to do
something at the time of any sort.
- To put yourself in the mind of a
developer at that time, I think it's
very easy, to everybody listening
to this, it's very easy at that
time to convince yourself to
take a few thousand dollars-
... a few thousand dollars to do
it. To say no to much more money—
... takes guts and takes vision.
- The last offer I had was obscene,
and they say, "Yeah, but imagine
with all that money you could build
something new, open source," right?
It was like the mind trick was,
it was difficult.
But for me it was just like, "No, this doesn't
work like that or this is not the right thing,
so I don't do it."
and again, right, it's not that I don't
like money or whatever. It's just like
it wasn't right.
- Well, once again, thank you from me
and from the rest of the internet.
Let me talk a little bit more about
the open source movement, about the
fact that, as you say over and
over and over and over, FFmpeg,
is and many open source
projects are built by
volunteers. So there's a
bit of drama recently,
uh, Kieran, on the interwebs, on Twitter.
You have a spicy style
on Twitter that I think
articulates and celebrates all
the incredible developers and
development and the code, especially
assembly that's involved in building some
of these codecs and building some of this
incredible technology. But that
brings us to the, a bit of a
debacle that happened. Tell me the
full saga of what happened with
the Google security engineers.
- Just to be clear, Google are one of the
biggest supporters of open source out there.
They have been for a long time.
It's just I think some things kind
of went a bit overboard
this time. So FFmpeg
itself, and this is not like a secret,
it's on the homepage, you know, the,
it processes untrusted data. There
can be security issues when you parse
untrusted data. That's very normal. But
recently what changed was Google started
using AI to create security reports
on an open source project, FFmpeg.
Volunteers had to deal with that.
They did, they provided very limited
funding, and they even went to the media
first announcing how good their AI was
before the issues could be fixed.
- And this is in the public forum.
- Yeah, this is all public.
- So report, reporting an issue, using
AI to find an issue in the code,
which is a security vulnerability, and then
reporting that publicly before you're able to fix
it.
- Yeah. It's announcing how good their
AI is, that they provided a standard
90-day industry deadline without
without really understanding
the nature of volunteer-driven
development. In addition, this vulnerability
was on an obscure 1990s game codec.
the way-- And let's look at it from their
standpoint to begin with. Let's you know—
- Yeah. Can you steer me in their case?
- Yeah, sure. They have substantial resources
working on the security of open source
projects
that, you know, are ubiquitous, and they've
used, you know, a lot of compute to do
that and very expensive and very
capable security researchers,
to do that. And that's their
viewpoint is they are contributing by
doing that. But I think
that's where opinions differ.
it opened up a lot of interesting
fissures I would say.
it does seem that there's a portion
of the security community that
look at themselves a bit like building
architects that never have to go to site.
You know, going to site is something that
is a little bit beneath them, the actual
day-to-day construction. They're there to do
their security things and it's someone else's
problem. The security
industry also kind of has
a very aggressive tone towards things.
The, the language they use is extremely
aggressive. They use very strong language
like, "You will get popped." So and to,
Joe Public, get popped,
you know, means something quite bad.
For them it means to get hacked.
The way I would look at it personally is a
little bit like the padlock on your home.
The padlock on your home or,
you know, the lock on your home
is there to protect against the
capabilities of what it's there to protect.
It's not there to protect nuclear secrets.
It's not there to protect Fort Knox. And
it could be looked at that they're
using AI at a level of scale to go
and pick those locks and
then say, "Hey, your
lock's not secure. You need to deal with
this." Whereas actually they're the ones with
resources to be able to
fix this. But that seems to not be something
either they'll contribute to in terms of
patches or in terms of financially. And
the scale of AI is kind of the issue.
The bug reports are very
wordy. They're very,
very-- It's almost a denial of
service by AI-generated bug
reports on very niche codecs.
and the other issue the security community
has is everything is marked high priority.
You're going to, you know, "This is the most important
thing in the world, and you need to deal with this.
High, high, high, vulnerable,
scary, scary, scary,"
on a game codec used on one disk in 1993.
And that's where the
dichotomy lies. Going around
telling everyone that their padlock's not
safe, well, that's a hobby project of
somebody. The safety of
that codec is consummate to
what that person thinks. It's their hobby. It's
good that they're security analyzing it, but it
doesn't need a big scary warning,
"This is a critical vulnerability."
We also may recently also
see that there was another
quote-unquote vulnerability. It
wasn't at Google in this case, but
a filter could overflow and have an
integer overflow, and one of your
pixels could be the wrong color. And this
was marked high, 7.5 severity in red.
And at some point, the security industry
needs to realize you can't keep crying wolf
like this because this just leads to people,
you know, the equivalent thereof of putting
password stickers on their PC. You know,
you can't just keep crying wolf every day.
And I appreciate, you know, that's their
modus operandi is to create as much
scare and fear. But from the Google
standpoint, at the end of the day,
they need to contribute either
financially or with patches. Google
uses FFmpeg at a scale probably you
or I couldn't even contemplate,
millions of CPU cores.
And yes, they contribute in areas mostly
regarding their own products, so VP9, AV1.
But in a wider sense,
there's a disproportionate level of contribution.
Yes, they fund students. Yes, they fund Summer
of Code. And I think so Alex Strange
is a former FFmpeg developer I think
posting in a personal capacity.
- So he posted about security engineers on
Hacker News. His post reads,
"The problem with security
reports in general is
security people are rampant
self-promoters, in parentheses, Linus
once called them something
worse. Imagine you're a humble
volunteer open source developer. If a
security researcher finds a bug in your code,
they're going to make up a cute name
for it, start a website with a logo.
Google is going to give them a
million-dollar bounty. They're going to
go to DEF CON and get a prize,
and I assume go to some
kind of secret security people
orgy where everyone is dressed
like they're in The Matrix.
Nobody is going to do any of
this for you when you fix it." basically
commenting on the sort of the incentives
for the different people
involved and misaligned.
- The problem here is the
disproportion of means on discovery
compared to patching it, right? And
this is the biggest issue, right?
And after that debacle,
Google did some changes.
- They are now starting to
send patches, which is-
- And they also now have reward
tools for fixing issues. So
it has changed a bit because of
that debacle. So it's good, right?
But we've seen, and we talk about
Google, but we have seen like some
other large companies saying, "Oh, you need
to fix this bug because it's critical in our
product."
- Can you explain the XZ fiasco?
The FFmpeg tweet reads,
"The XZ fiasco has shown
how a dependence on
unpaid volunteers can cause
major problems. Trillion-dollar
corporations expect free
and urgent support from
volunteers. Microsoft,
Microsoft Teams posted on a
bug tracker full of volunteers
that their issue is high priority.
After politely requesting a support
contract from Microsoft for long-term
maintenance, they offered a one-time
payment of a few thousand dollars
instead. This is unacceptable. We
didn't make it up. This is what
Microsoft Teams actually
did." And then you give
the image and the details and all that kind
of stuff, showing that these trillion-dollar
companies are not giving much
money, not giving much support.
- They think an open source project is a
traditional vendor that they have an
SLA. They think a public
bug tracker is actually,
you know, a third-party vendor's Jira
where you can do all of these things. It's
not. It is there to report bugs.
I think the thing that made
this particularly heinous was
the name-dropping of Microsoft, the
name-dropping that this is a visible product.
If this was just a general bug report,
I think that would have made it a lot
better.
- Yeah, so they literally said, like,
"This is a big deal because a lot of
people are using it in
Microsoft." I wonder what
happens psychologically. So I think what
happens in these companies, maybe you can
correct me, is they— You're right. They
just think of FFmpeg as like a vendor that
Microsoft surely is paying
a huge amount of money to.
They kind of assume that
in their interaction, and
nobody anywhere on the stack
is going like, "Wait a minute.
Shouldn't we be giving like
millions of dollars to FFmpeg?"
- And this is a very big problem in
large— Like we're talking about some
companies, but it's the same
everywhere, right? A lot of those
companies. Like the, when we
talk to that person, right,
he was just like a manager on one
project in Microsoft Teams, right? He
had never really discussed
with open source community. He
had no idea, right? It
was like—but the problem
is that usually there is what we call
OSPOs, right? Open source program
offices in those type of companies, and
they are the ones who are supposed to
discuss with open source vendors. Um,
or open source communities. But like
they often don't explain that correctly
internally, right? And here it's just like
we are not your supplier. If you want
me to be your supplier, I'm very
happy, right? I will send you a
contract and SLAs. Like I created
five companies who are doing that around
open source projects, so that's okay.
- We should say that some of the
spicy tweets that Kieran, you're
behind, and some of the
debacle produced results.
- Yes.
- Positive results.
- Donations have increased substantially.
They're still not enough to
cover even a single
full-time developer, but
on both a, you know, awareness
level and a technical level,
there's substantially more technical awareness
and sort of awareness of the importance
of FFmpeg as a result, as
a result of X and what's
happened. I can say, you know,
it solved its purpose. People
realize the level of
importance FFmpeg has.
- And on VideoLAN it's the same, right? Like
for example, a, a very simple example.
For more than a year, we
couldn't update VLC on
Android because of a bug on the
Play Store, on Android Play
Store, right? The only way
we got someone to answer
was to put a very spicy, as you say
tweet saying that we are going
to stop distributing VLC
for Android, right? And we have around 100
million people using that. And now then
someone from Android actually came and
discussed to us, right? We had the
same issue with Microsoft or,
or like saying that we were
going to stop distributing
VLC on the Windows Store. And
unfortunately, we are so small that the
only very strong power we
have to solve those issues
is blaming on social network
because it snowballs and
now they listen to us. But so as
large companies often have difficulty
talking to us. Like for example, VLC,
right, is probably one of the top
10 software used on Windows. I
am not part of Microsoft ISV
programs, right? I don't have a point
of contact at Microsoft, right?
While I'm sure any other
software, Adobe, Spotify, has a
point of contact. I don't
have that, right? So
raising awareness works. It's sometimes
very spicy, lot of drama. Well,
X and Twitter are okay for
that, but it's efficient.
- Uh, so everybody listening to this should
go follow FFmpeg on Twitter, on X, follow
VideoLAN on Twitter, on X. Go
donate. Donate ... to FFmpeg.
- And thank you, Lex. Over the years, several
years you've been a supporter of, you
know, FFmpeg and VideoLAN on X. You know,
giving us shout-outs, appreciating,
you know, what we do.
- FFmpeg for life.
- And for example, like Tim
Sweeney, Carmack, and a few
others, like very high-level people
have raised also the awareness
on our X accounts, and
that helped a lot also.
- Karpathy as well.
- Karpathy, yes.
- Karpathy as well, yeah.
- Yeah. I mean, also, you know, outside of
the fact that so many people use it, it's
so impactful on the world, it's also a
great representation of a great open
source project. Like the value of assembly
and C and making sure that like you take
programming seriously
for real world systems.
- It's not just that. We'll talk about assembly later I'm
sure, 'cause that's its whole topic in itself, but it's
also celebrating people like Andreas
Rheinhardt who do maintenance. It is, I
believe unpaid, as I believe as
a volunteer. He's doing massive
refactorings. Uh, Andreas
Rheinhardt and Anton Khirnov
rewriting ffmpeg.c with threading.
Celebrating those guys,
celebrating the untold
labor that's gone into this
that actually doesn't change anything from the
user standpoint. The files are exactly the
same, but wow, the, the, the airplane
has been rebuilt whilst it's in the air.
- Christian Garcia said, "As a teenager running
this account," referring to the FFmpeg
... account, and you responded,
"Teenagers have written more assembly
in FFmpeg than Google engineers." But also
just pointing out that there's a lot of
incredible contributors who are teenagers.
- Like JB said, we don't care who you
are, where you're from, what you do.
Teenagers have written
thousands of lines of assembly,
Over the years. Give a shout-out
back in the days to Daniel Kang.
So also highlighting the work of people like
Ruikai Peng. This is a 16-year-old, some of his
first contributions to FFmpeg,
actually doing and putting some of these quote
unquote security researchers to shame by
by actually finding issues
and fixing them and being
16. There's no barriers. There's
no barriers to you have to
study on, at college under this person
and understand these. It's you can
learn C, and let's be honest, it's
from, it's from the K&R book. Learn C.
You can learn assembly. We'll talk
about that maybe a bit later.
You can contribute to
world-class technologies.
- In VLC one of the oldest
contributors called
Felix, he's the one doing everything
on Mac and iOS. He's starting
working on VLC. He was
16. We had a guy called
Edward Wong, who used to be a
Google Summer of Code student who
stayed for three years
around VideoLAN. He was 14,
right? And, and part of Google
Summer of Code and Google
Code-in, which were programs where
basically we have students or high school,
We wrote a ton of assembly
for x264 and for VLC
and for FFmpeg, right? So
everyone can contribute.
- And he also did a good job because
he didn't play the alarmist CVE
heist, create a CVE, which is like, a
public exposure of security
and do these big scary
red 7.5 high priority. He
just fixed an issue in Git
after three days and just fixed it.
He didn't need to go and play a big
security drama about it. And I think
I posted, you know, the kids are all
right. Whereas- there's, you know,
there is a por- I'm not saying all security
people do this, but there is a portion of the
security community, as Alex said,
that likes to hype themselves up by
creating drama. They would have
happily raised, "This is a high
priority CVE 8.0" or whatever on a
issue that actually was in Git. It wasn't even
in a release, it was in development, and three
days later was fixed.
- Well, I just want to put a little bit
of love out there, even to the bigger
much love and respect to Google
engineers. Like you said, they're
Some of the, the best software engineers in
the world, and they do contribute a lot-
... even on the security front. And
also, you know, I'm a big fan of
Theo. Much love to Theo.
He was part of this,
Debacle and drama a little bit.
I think when you just zoom
out on the grand arc of human history,
the drama contributed positively to
everybody involved. Donations went up.
It brought more attention
to the topic, allowed
everybody to bicker in a way that
ultimately got them to figure out
what FFmpeg is all about.
- So the way we looked at this is like it's a
rap battle at the end of the day, you know?
No, but it is. We say stuff, we say stuff-
... but we can, we can leave it on. X is a
perfect place for, you know, international rap
battle. You say stuff. I say stuff about your
mama, but it doesn't mean, you know, I have
an actual personal issue with her.
Uh, and that's what it looks like. The Theo
situation, you know, JB can maybe expand, went a
little bit too far and there was a little...
But, you know, it's just a bit of fun.
It's just a bit of rap battle.
It's a bit, it's WWE. You know,
everyone's having a bit of fun on X.
It doesn't need to be taken seriously.
You know, the teenagers thing, you know,
that... So that guy was a Google employee saying,
"Hey, you know, there are other ways to run
an open source business." You know, go and there's
like, oh, man, just have a bit of fun, you know?
That's what the point of this account is.
And, and furthermore, if you can teach people
about the ways of open source projects,
assembly, et cetera, by doing
that, I think there's a lot to be offered here.
It's not dunking on people for dunking's sake.
It's showing actually the story that
I think X learnt is these are not big
corporate open source projects. This
is not Kubernetes where there's,
you know, hundreds, maybe
thousands of people-
... paid to develop this stuff. These are just
people in their basements in their spare time,
and if you can address that topic
in a fun and entertaining way-
... I think that's the good thing and
that's, that's the value of X and
then the reach we have.
- And to be honest, right, like
even at Google, Google is
one entity, but so many different
people, right? And there is a ton
of Google engineers we work with
all the time, and even like
Google from YouTube to Chrome to
Chrome Media to the rest of Google, those
are very different types of entities. But
what we do is efficient.
And, for example for,
for Theo, right? It went a bit too far.
I had him... Like I calmed everyone
down. I had him on the phone. We said,
"Okay, like this goes too far," and so on.
But in the end yeah, it's a rap
battle, but it's positive for the
project. It, like the awareness
we have on open source and,
and I mean true open source
from communities right now is
increased dramatically in the last
two years, and this is useful.
- Uh, what do you think motivates all the
incredible contributors that we've been
talking about? Like, what's the
engine? It's so interesting to see.
- So-
- Like you said, they're sitting in the basement.
What's the driver? What's the engine there?
- There are many drivers,
but weirdly the main one
is that what we do in multimedia
plays videos, and video is
cool, right? And, and for
example, we have so many
people in the community who arrive
because they loved watching
anime, right? And this is like
the advice when people ask me,
"What should I work on in open source? How do
I start?" And my answer is always the same:
work on something you love.
I am working on VLC because I
love movies, right? And I love
watching the same movies over and over,
even if my wife hates me when I do
that, right? But because it's interesting,
right? Because it's a topic that
you like, right? The first, that's
the first thing where people come to
usually to VLC and FFmpeg.
The second thing is that
technically we, because we
search for excellence, this is
the best school ever, right?
This is the best school
ever of programming. If
you're good in C, in
FFmpeg, if you know how to write
assembly, I assure you you're going to
be one of the best programmers ever,
even if you're working on writing
TypeScript, because this is
the most amazing thing to
do. And you will, like, have
to get reviews by some of
the most seasoned programmers
ever who are going to look at
every part of your code and tell you why
it's not great. It's like we are the
best teachers that you've ever
had in programming, right?
- Andrew Kelley started Zig. He was an
FFmpeg developer and started Zig after
his FFmpeg school. I mean,
it's the place to learn so many
aspects of programming in the
real world, in a thing used by billions
of people. You have nowhere to
hide. You have to be open and honest
about your flaws and how you can learn
and be better.
- And what is also interesting
in multimedia is
that you have 16 milliseconds to
display a frame. It's not like
a game engine where you can basically
slow down and wait a frame.
Like, so it's, you need to be good, right?
There is no choice, else you don't have your
video. And because of how codecs,
if you miss a frame, you're going
to destroy the look of the video,
right? So you need to be good.
You need to be perfect to have
the right thing. But also
is that it's not just pure programming
in the mathematical sense, right?
A lot of people don't understand, but
in order to program correctly on the
open source multimedia community,
you need to understand how computers
work. And when you write assembly,
you need to understand about CPU
pipelining, right? You need to
understand how SIMD works, how
the ALU works, right? You need to
understand what, how IO works,
right? And this is what I
think that is missing to a lot of
engineers and software engineers today, is
understanding what we call
computer architecture. And,
like, seriously, like some of the debates is
like, should we use this assembly call or this
one? And people say, "Well, no, it's
going to be like three cycles on this
type of CPU and this one," and has
massive impact on the output, right?
- We should expand. FFmpeg is probably one of
the biggest CPU users in the world. There's
it's probably running— ... as we speak
easily 100 mil- order of magnitude 100
million, maybe even a billion CPUs
as we speak. So every instruction
matters. There's not...
The impact, at least in terms of CPU,
is massive for everything that we do.
- So first you come because it's an interesting
subject, then you stay because it's
excellent, and in the end
you're very proud of it because
it's in the hands of
everyone. Like so many
people like, "Oh, I'm working for whatever
consulting company and I'm doing some
portal to download invoices
for your PG&E." Wow,
great. Like, so many jobs are
like that. You're not going to,
to tell that to your grandma. But if you
go to see your grandma and say, "I do
this so that you can play video on your
laptop," they understand. And this is very
important, right? Because you're
working on VLC, FFmpeg, H.264. It's
in the hands of hundreds of millions
of people and you have an impact.
And so you can be proud of
yourself. And so I think that
in addition to doing a great resume, all
those things are why people contribute.
- Yeah, those are side effects. My favorite
quote on this topic is John Collison.
He said, "The world is a museum of passion
projects." You know, everything out
there is a passion project. And open
source multimedia and open source
in general, you can just do that
so much faster. There's such a
faster network effect, you know?
I can open a cafe and that can be my passion project,
but I have to get building codes, I have to build a
building, I have to find a location,
I have to do all the, you know, all
sorts of things. Well, in the software
world, that passion project can be,
can move quickly, it can be
amplified by the network effect,
and that amplification can
be more than the sum of the
parts. You know, you can
be, you can find people
interested in extremely obscure things
and have a network effect and make
something that is truly amazing.
- And on that topic of passion projects
Tim Sweeney actually said in a reply
to a tweet that was
complimenting JB. He said,
quote, "Many things in the world
only happen because an awesome
person decides to do it. This
is the case with VLC." And
that speaks to something interesting to me,
that it does seem that a small number of
people, sometimes one person, can create
something incredible in the software world.
Like you said this over and over and
over. I think JavaScript is an
incredible thing created by,
Initially a single person. Some
of the programming languages like
Python and C and Java, like
just one person has this
vision, has this design, and brings
it sometimes over a weekend is the
initial spark.
- Yes, Linus built Git in two weeks. Wow.
- It changed the world, Git. I mean,
it really changed the world.
- Linus' passion project. "Hey, I'm uploading
this tarball to an FTP, like deal with it."
- But for me, it's not just in
software, right? And I believe in,
in individuals that are going to
change the world, right? And it's with
a good, as you said, vision,
right? I want to do that. It
is useful, it will be useful. And
whether it's going to like build
train or cars or rockets or
something like, I believe
people who believe in themself
and have a vision can have a huge
impact for humanity.
- Let's actually zoom out before
we zoom back in. We'll just keep
going up and down the stack.
So you know, we've been
talking back and forth VLC and
FFmpeg. Kieran, you said that
FFmpeg and VideoLAN, VLC coexist,
and there's no central point
of importance. It's a kind of
what you call the binary star system.
Uh, they succeed because of each other.
Can you explain the difference, how
they interact? What is the-
... are they competitors?
- I don't think they're competitors.
I think the simple answer is, the
short answer before I go into detail is
VLC is to FFmpeg as Android is to Linux.
So they depend on each other, but they
coexist because of each other. So they
are a binary star system
is the analogy I used.
- By the way, I feel horrible that I
just recently learned that Alpha
Centauri, the closest star system
to us, is a triple star system.
- And when you start doing the physics, it's
a nightmare, right? But, but, but like-
- Hence the three body problem.
But anyway. So a lot of
FFmpeg pipelines involve
the x264 project, which is
a VideoLAN project. I would put
a finger in the air and say
80-plus percent of those pipelines
are dependent on a VideoLAN project.
VLC, obviously, as we've discussed,
a VideoLAN project, uses
FFmpeg, gives it reach,
exposure to weird files,
Historically used some
donation money to fund FFmpeg
development, and we'll talk a bit maybe
about some of the reverse engineering later.
So it's a binary star system. They work and
feed off each other. Many of the developers are
shared. There's no central location.
It's a virtuous cycle working together.
- And we should mention that x264 is the
encoder for H.264 video standard. So
H.264 is the standard. X264-
- Is the open source
implementation of the standard
- ... that's used by basically
everybody- ... for everything.
It's, that is the main driver of
this. When you think of an MP4
file that has H.264 codec in it-
- If it came from a software environment,
like a data center or somewhere,
the chances are it was created with x264.
- And that's under the flag of VideoLAN.
- That's a VideoLAN project. So in the
VideoLAN graphic, it sits in the VideoLAN
world.
- And VideoLAN has a, says a
bunch of stuff in it. Go to the
VideoLAN website, there's
a bunch of icons.
- Like if you look, there is
so many libraries, right?
- libdvdcss- ... libdvdnav, libdvdpsi,
libvlc of course, vlc-unity, libblu-
Blu-ray. Uh, yeah, there's many more.
- And there is so many more, right?
Lately, lately the dav1d project
that we might talk about is the
last project from VideoLAN. It's
everywhere, right? And we do,
we have a libspatialaudio lately
that we announced. We have a-
- checkasm.
- checkasm-
- We'll talk about that later
- ... which is like an insane project-
... but amazing. So and x264 is one of
those VideoLAN projects. And my
opinion, for example, is that
x264 was, is the most amazing
encoder ever designed,
and this helped the adoption of
FFmpeg. A lot of people and large
companies went through FFmpeg
because they wanted to use
x264, and x264 increased the
popularity of FFmpeg. But
also VLC had its popularity because
it's played so many files that were
done by FFmpeg, right? So it's,
it's many projects that are
intertwined and work together.
- Yeah. Unfortunately, there's a, there's
a thing on X where VLC is mentioned and
there's people, "A quick reminder that it's FFmpeg
inside doing the actual work." And that, and
that's like I said, it's not, that's
not the case. We work together.
- And to give you an idea, right? When I
compiled VLC for Windows, I compiled
around 16 million lines
of code, right? One
million of those are inside the VLC repository,
and FFmpeg in total is probably two,
around two, right? But so it means that
so many dependencies are outside. And
if you also look at FFmpeg
per se, FFmpeg also is
integrating third-party
libraries like x264, but
LibOpus and so many others, right?
So we all depend on each other.
- Uh, yeah, that's why I was hoping to
do this episode as we are doing that
just kind of joins FFmpeg and VLC-
... because it's really, it's, it's
really two of the same, like you said,
binary star system and we're all just
orbiting it. Can we give a shout-out
to some of the people along the
way? We didn't really quite talk
about the history of FFmpeg, so-
maybe can you tell me about
Fabrice? Can you tell me about
Michael Niedermayer? Can you tell me
about some of the key figures here?
- Let's just talk about the eras
of FFmpeg, because there's
key eras and key people that made this
possible. Uh, Fabrice Bellard,
as you mentioned, creating the
concept, and then probably in the
2000 era, I would call the era,
eras tour of FFmpeg is the 2000
era was Michael Niedermayer. So
key things he got done was
exhaustive support for DivX and
Xvid at the time, and all sorts
of weird variants of what's known
as MPEG-4 Part 2. So this predates the
MPEG-4 Part 10 that we're used
to. So this was 2000 era video
codecs where there were, oh, flavor
after flavor of weird decoders.
At the time in the 2000s, you needed a new
player to play every different type of file
format. So there was Windows Media Player
to play Windows Media formats. There
was RealPlayer to play RealMedia formats.
And those were the other, the other
key thing in FFmpeg at the time were native
decoders for those. I actually do remember
being a teenager, I must have been,
figuring out there was this
one player that could play,
could decode these files without having
separate bloated players. Because
at the time when you downloaded RealPlayer, there
was a ton of other stuff in there, a ton of ads, a
ton of other things, and
just having a simple library
that was fast led to that. And then
I think 2008 was a, 2008 onwards
was a big change because that's when
H.264 got its maturity and I think
something hopefully we'll talk about a bit more.
This was the beginning of high definition video.
So H.264 was the key decoder of that.
So I'd call that the late 2000s and
2010s, and that's when the big reverse
engineers came along and
really did astonishing work.
The beginning was a single player
that could play Xvid, DivX,
Windows Media, and RealPlayer was already a
massive achievement in itself without codec
packs, without weird stuff you had to download
that had weird ads and weird spyware.
- VLC 1.0 was out on those
times, 2000, 2009, 2010.
And this is like where it exploded.
- Yeah, without codec packs, it just
works- ... across all these different-
- It, de facto, it's just like all the
codec packs are FFmpeg inside VLC,
plus we have other modules
for all the type of codecs.
- But back at the time that wasn't, is there
were weird, in the 2000s, there were weird
codec packs with DLLs coming from
this place, DLLs coming that-
- With a lot of spyware
- ... with spyware, with you know what. It wasn't
reliable, you didn't know, and having a single
player that was open source or
single playback module/player that
could do this that was open source.
But I think the thing to emphasize is
this task in the 2000s that Michael
did was Sisyphean. It was really,
the number of edge cases are poor
beyond comprehension in terms of
you could have a Chinese CCTV
system that did one weird variant
of MPEG-4 Part 2, what's
known as MPEG-4 ASP,
and that was a weird variant, and you had to
fix that without breaking everybody else-
... times a million.
- So that's, so you said that's where a lot
of the reverse engineering was happening.
- It started in the 2000s with the
Windows Media stuff because that was-
... proprietary. It started with the
RealMedia, so with Benjamin Larsson.
- Kostya Shishkov.
- Kostya Shishkov, that era. Those
were the key, that was the key
groundwork. And then in
the 2010s was kind of
the Paul Mahol, Kostya era
building, doing some of the
most difficult codecs. JB maybe
can talk about GoToMeeting 4 and
GoToMeeting 5, and-
- What? What's the GoToMeeting?
- So, like, let's talk about this
amazing Ukrainian guy called Kostya, who
was at that time living in Germany, and who
was in love with Sweden, right? He—
And the guy was the most... He's like,
like a lot of the people in the
community are very clever. He's
one of those who are, like,
borderline geniuses, right?
He was able to reverse engineer
extremely complex codecs,
And he does that, and we
do a bit of engineers with
Kieran, but clearly not at this level.
- No, no, yeah.
- Um, he reverse engineered binary
blobs, which are 20 megabytes?
- Yeah, so just for reference, one
megabyte binary blob to reverse
engineer is probably order of magnitude
a month of work, and this guy is doing
20, 30 megabyte blobs. Maybe we'll
talk about that in a minute, about the
subtleties of how you do that. But this guy is
doing it for very difficult and very obscure
codecs.
- And did that for fun, right? And so
GoToMeeting was a big problem with VLC
because that was like the number one
feature request for a long time, so I put
a bounty. And the guy at some point said,
"Okay, JB, I'm going to do
it." And in a matter of two
months, and then he explained how he did it.
He was just like, "Oh, I looked at the code,
like this looked like a DCTs
that I used to see on WMV
and so on." He did that, and
the funniest part is that
the code he's written
is a ton of jokes. And
there is, there is a ton of
JB, right, my name, and, and
Kempf and Kempf and Kostya jokes inside
the code. The code is beautiful, right?
- So one of the things I wanna
comment is I've gotten a chance to
speak to some of the developers,
some of the assembly language level
People, and they all always make
everything sound like it's kinda easy.
There's a kind of humility because, maybe
just the level of what's
required to do this stuff is so
high that everything else seems easy, I
guess is the lesson to take away from that.
- So in the community, like some of the
most impressive people are the ones doing
reverse engineering- ... and the other
ones doing the assembly folds, right?
Um, and both of those type of people are
amazing. x264, for example, became amazing
because, of a guy called Loren Merritt—
... who is, was from University
of Washington, I think.
- At the time, yeah.
- And who was, like, who made everything
great and fast doing a ton of assembly.
Um yeah. So this is like the
the golden era, I guess, where
so many things got done.
- So, yeah, if you look at Kostya, for example, he
looked at the world as a binary specification.
He didn't need documentation or anything.
It's, "I have a binary and I can
figure all of this out." And he
regularly used the phrase binary
specification. "Ah, you know, it's not a problem."
And he would go away, and he would come back, and
he would do interesting stuff.
- Can you actually speak to
the details or add color and
texture to what it takes to
reverse engineer a blob?
- Yeah. So let's look at GoToMeeting,
for example, is a good one because,
um, I record a meeting on
GoToMeeting, for example.
How do I play it back without
needing this GoToMeeting
player? There may not even be a player. I may,
I may need to send a recording of a meeting to
someone that doesn't have
a player or whatever.
So first of all, there's a ton of other
stuff there. There's an actual video
conferencing client. You need to go and find, it
may be easy, it may not be easy to find the actual
module doing the decompression.
You need a way to
actually dump the YUV data
from the module. So often it
involves opening in a disassembler,
trying to guess where the hooks are
to incorporate that module
and run that module natively
to decode a sample file. So figure
out where this module is doing
the decoding process and
find a way to hook in and
output the raw YUV data,
'cause you will need that-
... as a point of comparison for when you actually do
the reverse engineering, 'cause you'll need to be bit
exact or in some cases close to bit exact.
And then you open up your disassembler,
use a lot of intuition to go and figure
out, you know, where the DCT is,
where's entropy coding.
There, there is a kind of,
not a rule book, but there's always
a pattern of some sort. For example,
GoToMeeting, you know it will be
a s- a lot of screen codec tools.
There's also different variants, so often
I think there's, what, GoToMeeting 4, 5-
- Well, 2 or 3, 4, I think.
- 2, 3, 4.
- So as you mentioned here, going to
Perplexity, GoToMeeting uses its own
proprietary codec for older s- recorded
sessions historically stored in
WMV files that require a special
decoder to play properly on
Windows. Without this decoder
installed, Windows Media
Player and some editors cannot
decode the video track, so you
may only hear audio or see a
black screen. Boy, do I remember
that. But this is reverse
engineering that.
- This is key, right? Because the GoToMeeting
is something that not many people know
anymore, right? Well, you know about Zoom
and, and Teams and so on. But like, now
let's fast-forward 10 years,
15 years, and like this is a
GoToMeeting.exe for Windows 32
bits, right? Which is like, oh
yeah, but I'm on Android, I'm on an iPad,
I'm somewhere else, right? How are you
going to do that? I'm going to be on
RISC-V, on Arm. Those are blocked,
but there are tons of files we
need support for the future.
And this is why those type of work are—
exceptionally useful for humanity.
- I just have to say, though, that reverse
engineering process is mind-blowing.
It's crazy. It's like,
it's a kinda like, you know, I've
been reading a lot and interview
archeologists. I mean, you
just have so little signal.
Yes, yes, you know over time
you get so much experience, you
understand the structure of the original
code, so you can kinda start inferring
basics. But you're like-And
we like archaeologists with a
little brush trying to reconstruct
the entire human civilization
- Kieran is too humble, but Kieran has
done some reverse engineering also.
- Of CineForm, yeah, at the time, um-
- CineForm, nice
- ... yeah, at the time before actually led
to the open sourcing of that work. Um,
so in parallel to doing the binary side,
you obviously have samples. In many
cases, you don't have many samples so
you have to figure out what all the
different flavors are, and you may have a
s- So CineForm, for example, is actually a
collection of different approaches and
toolkits within that codec 'cause often
it grows naturally. And the hard part is
finding a sample that gets you kind of
somewhere to start without having to
implement 10 different other things. So
start there.
I think thankfully at the time I found a sample
by pure chance that had a lot of flat blocks.
It was animation, so that
really helped a lot because
it wasn't using particularly complex coding
tools, et cetera, and you could kind of get
somewhere and then, and then build up and
build up until you figure, "Hey, here's a few
bits here. I missed this. I missed this, this if
branch that it does," and go, "Oh." So when we
say samples, you mean sample videos-
... and then, and then you're tracking,
trying to infer, like, what is this
codec doing- ... by observing the
sample and then looking at what, at
the lo- at, at the machine lo-
- The machine code saying-
- At the machine code
- ... "Ah, I have byte, this byte is six.
Take this branch." And in a different
sample, oh, it's-
- That's nuts, man.
- And-
- That is nuts
- ... so you see, this is nuts. Then
you go to things like GoToMeeting.
- Yeah, yeah.
- It's like-
- Mine was easy, right?
- ... imagine-
- Yeah, right
- ... two order of magnitude of
more complexity. A guy alone
somewhere in Germany doing that.
And for a long time, you work, you're
in a black box because a decoder,
for a long time, because there is so many
steps from the entropy decoding, the intra
prediction, the motion prediction,
the IDCT, and so on. For a long
time, you don't see anything, right?
So you're debugging purely in memory.
- Debugging guesswork.
- And you may have the buffer that the
coefficients are stored in completely wrong,
and so you may be going down a complete
rabbit hole thinking it's this and then,
oh damn, that's not, that's,
that's something else, and-
- And you're doing that on binaries
that are tens of megabytes,
millions of instructions, right?
- So you're stepping through the debugger,
like one by one, you know, instruction by instruction
going, "Hey, this instruction changes this.
This does this."
- Pausing the program on
the CPU level. Like it's-
- Pausing it, yeah, on the CPU level, watching
what's going on, trying to figure out-
- Sometimes you need to, like, be in a
VM, so yeah, that you can pause the VM.
- Yeah, pause the VM, dump the memory, 'cause there
could, some of the codecs could have encryption.
There could be like a DRM on
there. So you need to dump the
memory from a virtual machine.
- Like when I joined École
Centrale Paris in 2003, Jon Lech
Johansen basically broke the
DVD specification and created
DeCSS, showed us how he was breaking a
DRM, which was MP4 FairPlay
from Apple. What he did
on his laptop, and I was young, I
was 21, was just like mind-blowing
because he was basically debugging
Windows inside a type of VM
with ex- Like, wow. It's incredible. It's
mind-blowing and inspiring.
Does it get, like from your
experience and from what you've seen in
the community, does it get discouraging?
Does it get-
- People help you. People send you samples.
People are keen. Sometimes you don't
have access to an encoder, so
this is even more difficult because
you just, you just ask and you have to
ask for samples. I remember VideoLAN
used to tweet for samples at one
stage. "Hey, I need this
obscure sample," and-
- For a long time I was, "Oh, I need
this codec, and I need this codec."
- And if you were really lucky, you would
find like... If you were unlucky, you'd get
like one or- you'd get nothing or you'd get one or
two, and then they would... Sometimes you'd find a
goldmine. It's like, "Yeah, my company has 100,000
of these files 'cause we're dependent on it for
some reas-" Um, and so those are the,
those are kind of the best if, if...
Because then they can test bit exactness
across the huge range of coding tools.
- Can you explain bit exactness?
- Bit exactness, so most but not all video
codecs, certainly from
about the 2000s onwards,
have a bit exact definition, so
every implementation must produce
exactly the same bits,
bit for bit, in exactly
the same data that comes out of a decoder.
- For like a large number of samples?
- For a given sample. So Lex's
implementation, JB's implementation, and my
implementation of H.264 must
match bit exactly. That
wasn't the case in the '90s of
MPEG-2, probably fair to say
one of the biggest mistakes the video industry
made, and I think people who were in the
room in '92, I don't think, most or both
of us were in diapers, I suspect- ... but
have acknowledged I would give
a shout-out to Yuri Reznik.
He's acknowledged that was one
of the big mistakes of the era.
- And you're saying the encoders needed to be
able to run tests and then the bit exactness.
the bit exactness. I mean, that's
a nice thing to guarantee.
Like there's a parallel sort of
development here on the way the web
browser works, which is a, you
know, takes HTML and displays
it, and there's no bit exactness
there across the different engines.
- I would point out actually FFmpeg
is unique in the sense that it's,
it has been a winner-takes-all scenario.
You have... Browsers is a good analogy
because it has to parse a lot of different
content and render it in a particular way, like a
decoder.
But there still are multiple browser engines. There's
Firefox's one, there's Chrome's one, there's a
few Japanese ones that are pretty decent.
That's not been the case in
multimedia in general across a
wide range of codecs. FFmpeg has kind of
won it all, I suppose, in a sense because
of, because of the fact that you can get
every new codec added is actually worth
more than the value of that codec itself
because it makes the whole thing better.
- Man, this is really cool. Going
to Perplexity. Yuriy Reznik is a
multimedia and signal processing
researcher, got his PhD in computer science
from Kyiv University with over
150 papers and more than 80
granted US patents, contributor
to major multimedia standards
including H.264, MPEG-4,
AVC-H.265 MPEG-4 ALS, G.718, and-
- G.71 is telco stuff. Telco.
- Oh. And so he was more
connected to companies.
- RealAudio, RealVideo, right? That was-
- Oh, yeah
- ... very important at that time
- ... Zencoder, Brightcove, Contex.
This, man, I need to hang out with
Yuriy. He's legit. And he's like
one of the most nice person-
- Slack guy, yeah
- ... ever, right? Like for
example, for my for my
startup that I'm doing right now called
Kyber, right? I met Yuriy because
I met him every year at the Mile High
Video Conference, which is in Denver.
And he gave me like so much good ideas
and good things. He's like
really amazing person.
- He tells us how, how, you know-
How great it is to be, you know,
even know us. And then we just like, you know,
you look at that and it's, I think it's the other
way around, Yuriy
- That reminds me of a thing that you
mentioned to me about FATE testing and,
like, the insanely rigorous
process that's used to
test everything that's incorporated
into into FFmpeg. Can you take
me through the testing process?
- Yeah. So FFmpeg has a system called FATE,
FFmpeg Automated Testing Environment.
Because FFmpeg runs on so many different
OSs and can be compiled with so
many different compilers,
there's been a crazy number of
configurations. So you can see the
absurd combination of compiler
variants, operating system variants,
instruction sets. You can see at
the top macOS has tons of different
variants because it has iOS, it has tvOS.
- Well, I'm looking at a
page fate.ffmpeg.org.
81 minutes ago, 76 minutes
ago, looking at the
different architectures, the operating
systems, the different compilers, Apple Clang
version...
- Combinations are crazy.
- ... the combination is insane. RISC-
- So these are all run by volunteers, so these
are all volunteer systems. The ones at the top,
for example, the Macs I host
in my office, for example,
Host all sorts of different stuff.
Other people host other things. So
it's really there to make sure...
because FFmpeg does quite complex C
code, for example, you do have
miscompilations. So the compiler
will sometimes compile C code
incorrectly. For example, this
happens once in a while.
- Oh, there's like, there's a
log of all the compilations.
- Yeah, log of all the compilations, all the tests. I
think one of the other ones will show all the tests
passing.
- If you click, you can see all the
tests- ... back. All tests successful.
- In logs test, yeah. So you see
all those tests are passing
of all the different codecs, all the
different filter transformations, all the-
The level of scale is quite crazy.
- Oh, that's nuts.
- On all the combinations. It's not just a
matrix at this point. It's like a pivot table
of different combinations.
- That's nuts.
- And it's a key part of what we do because
you may be able to test something
locally, you make a change,
but actually that breaks
GCC version 11 on Mac or
something like that, and you're
able to then fix that. We also have
miscompilation, so the C code,
sometimes the compiler can have a bug in
it where it creates the wrong output,
and that can have quite a big effect
sometimes on a video because of the
way frames have dependencies.
Even a small change in the output
can cascade to actually
quite big glitches.
- You see PowerPC, you
see RISC, you see ARM.
- There was PowerPC, there was RISC, there
was weird stuff in the past like DEC Alpha.
There was—
- You see Visual Studio, different
versions of Clang or GCC.
- Visual Studio, Intel compiler,
Apple Clang, you name it.
- What are some of the pain
points? Like maybe do you have
emotional triggers maybe
nightmares about a
particular operating system, a particular
container, codec combination of-
- I mean, for me, it's really easy
because I have a day job. My company
builds... The company I started builds
equipment for broadcasting sports matches
between TV stadiums and
studios, for example.
We have to work with 10-bit video, and
10-bit video has a set of challenges that
you can't process 10-bit data
natively on a CPU. So that means you
have to stick it in 16
bits. So that means you
have six wasted bits. So there's different
packing formats to actually pack
the data more efficiently because
when you send that over a network,
you lose... 'Cause you need to
save that 40%. For example, on PCI
Express, you may only have bus bandwidth
to do that. And so I think internally we
have about... Some are industry
ones and some are internal to our
own hardware that we build. We have a,
I think a 5 by 5 or 6 by 6 matrix of
every single format to every single
other format conversion. In fact, one,
one of them I sent you, and they're all written
in handwritten assembly, and they're all
written, and they all support
different CPU generations.
So this is really traumatic, handling
all these different combinations
times a million.
- By the way, the company you're talking
about is Open Broadcast Systems.
- Yeah, so no, no relation to the
free OBS streaming service.
But JB and I have started companies
broadly speaking around the FFmpeg
VLC ethos, so that's really
low-level work. So in most companies,
this wouldn't be written in
assembly. It would be
accepted that C is fast.
As you can see from that, C is not fast.
- So here it says 62 times faster than C.
- Yeah. So it's taking
those, the ethos of doing
low-level programming,
real-time programming,
and using that for commercial applications,
and JB and I have started companies around
that, in many cases hiring developers
from the open source community
to use that ethos. And so
that's a great example
of some of the things we're doing. In
most companies, it would be, say, "Oh,
I'll write this in C and it's fast and we're
done," but actually you can get a lot better.
- For me, like, some of the headaches we have
is around some OS that are difficult to
support, right? Because if you look at
VLC and thanks to FATE and FFmpeg, we run
on... The last version of
VLC runs on Windows XP
and still run there and runs on Windows
11. We work on macOS 10.7 to the
latest macOS, whatever it is, right, 26.
We work on iOS since iOS
9, well, we are actually
iOS 26, right? We support many types
of Linuxes, BSD, Solaris. The last
version still runs on OS/2,
right? Like there is maybe 10
users of OS/2 in the world, and one
of them is maintaining VLC. Then you
realize that this very small
team around VLC and using FFmpeg
codecs and all the other ones support more
OSs than Microsoft or Google or Apple, and
they have infinite amount of power and
resources. But for
example, the worst is iOS.
For in order to build on
iOS 9, we need to do some
very clever mixing of several versions of
the Xcode IDE and SDK from Apple, from
several versions, and do a type
of Frankenstein version of that
so that we can still support iOS 9,
which is not supported at all by the
compiler of Apple in order to
still run on Arm32 on iOS 9. And
you've seen on FATE that it was
still supporting iOS 9, right? So,
My headaches are mostly
related to the support
of so many OSs. And it's
important because, like, we
receive so many people saying, "Hey,
thank you. I still have my iPad 2 to
watch movies," and it still
works on iOS 9, right?
And it's also an impact of, like,
not forcing people to buy new
hardware when it works fine if you
optimize it correctly. Which brings us
to what we were saying about
assembly. It's also fighting, like,
the fact that you need to buy something
new nonstop while you could optimize
more, which is a lost art.
- You gotta tell me about
this lost art or this, uh-
... the carriers of the
flame of assembly. What
what is, what is assembly?
Why is it beautiful?
Why is it challenging? How does it work?
- So when you write assembly code, you
write this using the instructions the
actual processor is using directly.
So most of the time you would
write in a language, let's take C as a good
example. The compiler would use that to
create assembly language and machine code
instructions for you
based off your C code.
And there's a specific flavor of assembly
that we use in FFmpeg that's called
SIMD, SIMD, single instruction, multiple
data. So this means, for example,
say I want to add five to a number in
scalar assembly, so this is what's known
as you work on an individual element.
So I wanna have a number of-- I have the number
ten and I want to add five. I use the add
instruction, and I add five to
ten, and I get 15. With SIMD, with
SIMD, I can have a whole vector of 16 different
numbers. They could all be different.
If I want to add five to that,
I can run one instruction,
and that one instruction sums all
16 elements. And that, as you can
imagine, lends itself
very well to video. Video
is, you know, pixel grid, so
I can perform operations on
multiple pixels at the same time. The
key thing that we do differently in
FFmpeg is we don't use any
abstractions or any major
abstractions on top of that. So there's
a part of the world that uses what's
known as intrinsics. So these
are C functions that behave very
similarly but not quite the same
to writing assembly by hand.
So the registers that data is stored in
on the CPU, the compiler
allocates those for you.
And so the key thing to understand
was when we write SIMD is we have
a 10x, and not percentage, 10x to 50x
speed improvement. That, that function is
62x, um—
- That's nuts.
- ... on the FFmpeg account, as you know, posts
and tweets a lot about that to try and say,
"Hey, we are doing this stuff."
- You are a person who sees the
beauty in assembly, but it's also
extremely useful for these kinds
of application to actually-
... significantly outperform
even C, which is crazy.
- It is necessary. Right? Because, like,
one of the projects that we need to talk
about is called dav1d, right? So dav1d is
a decoder for the format that was done by
Alliance for Open Media which is
an, a video decoder called AV1.
- So if, for people who don't know,
we've been talking about H.264.
AV1 is another hugely popular standard
and codec that is increasingly taking
over the internet.
- And when this format was launched
many people said, especially
even from the Alliance for Open Media,
right, which is Google, Netflix, Amazon,
uh, Mozilla, say, "Well, this
format is so complex, it must be
done in hardware to do
decoding," right? And well, I
arrived with a few other people mostly
Ronald Henrik, and Martin, and
we said, "We need to have an
extremely good software decoder
because it's going to take
time to have hardware." And so we wrote this
project, which is beyond insane. We are
talking about 30,000 line of C, but 240,000
lines of handwritten Assembly, right?
- Handwritten Assembly, 240,000 lines.
That's incredible. That mean-- I mean, some of
the stuff we're talking about is probably the
biggest Assembly code bases.
- To give you an idea, and Kieran can
correct me, but I think the FFmpeg has
100,000 lines of Assembly
for all the codecs.
- For all codecs. Mm-hmm.
- And just this one has 240,000. It's
a VideoLAN project, of course. And
it is optimized at the maximum because the
motto when we're starting
the project is every cycle
matters, right? Every cycle
matters because David is
used in VLC and in some
software AV1 playback stacks.
We are talking about probably
3 billion devices which
are going to decode video nonstop
because, for example, 30% of the
video from Netflix are now
in AV1, 50% of YouTube,
right? So, and you often don't have
a hardware decoder because not
many devices have a hardware decoder.
And with dav1d, we realized that
with one or two cores you were able to
decode 720p correctly. So it is—literally—
- Yeah, that's dav1d
- ... incredible, right?
- That's dav1d. Look at that Lex.
- Uh, yeah, so this is
another spicy tweet from
you. This is what peak video codec
should look like, 79.9% assembly—
- That's almost
- ... 19.6% C and 0.5% other.
- And what's incredible is with those
tweets, which is factual, people get
crazy. They are unhappy, right? They say-
- For a year, for the last two years they go crazy,
"No, intrinsics is fine. The compiler is..." Oh, they
go, "I have never-"
- "You can optimize your compiler,
auto-vectorization, it's your fault, you don't
understand." And we've
tried that forever, right?
- For two years, and two years later,
showing hundreds of examples
of handwritten assembly. "No, no, no, you're
doing it wrong. The compiler can do this."
- So we should actually just articulate a little
clearer. So the intuition there from the
software engineering folks, when you have
code like... Okay, let's just take an
example, C++. There's a compiler that's
doing a lot of the optimization.
- Yes.
- And the presumption is if you have a
good enough compiler, if you continue to
improve the compiler, you're
going to generate code-
... that can perform like optimal
performance. You cannot possibly beat it.
- Yeah. Yes.
- And you're consistently challenging
that thought that if you do-
- By orders of magnitude
- ... by orders of magnitude- ...
handcrafted assembly can outperform C.
- The two things that they tell us
is, yeah, but modern compilers
have auto-vectorization, right?
Because SIMD that we're doing is
vectorization. And like
it's not even close, right?
It's not even close, right?
It's not like 5%, 10% slower.
It's multiple times slower.
- So can we... I don't know if you can say something philosophically, because
there's a lot of great software engineers, great engineers, great machine learning
lot of great software engineers, great
engineers, great machine learning
people. Karpathy will listen to this
and say, "What's the intuition he's
supposed to get from this?
What are we supposed to..."
- Karpathy learnt assembly because of the tweets by the
way. I just... He start- He went, he's like, "Oh, I
think this is a movement."
- He's like, "Let me figure
out what's happening here."
- No, no, he, and you know the way
he documents his work and so.
- Philosophically, what's
important to realize is that we
passed the time where hardware
was going so much faster, right?
We are at the end of Moore's law.
We have limitation for for AI,
for memory. You need to go
down in the stack and optimize
more to get more power from
what you have, because our
request for power, CPU power, GPU power
are exploding while the hardware
is not exploding in speed, right?
So you- what people do is that they add
more cores, right? But that's basically
like at some point you can add
250 cores, right? So what we
do is to take every inch of the machine.
- Not just that, not just that. We
abuse the machine. We go and use, we
use the machine in ways that the,
that the creator didn't expect. Sometimes we use
an instruction that's completely unrelated to
what we do. We use a cryptography instruction
in video processing to do nothing
related.
- And one of other things that we do,
for example in dav1d, which is a bit
crazy, is that we don't use the function
calling convention from
the operating system.
- We should explain that.
- That is extremely-
... complex. But basically, usually
when you do move from one function in,
in code to another, there is a
way to save the registers, the
state of the CPU to enter another
function. And this is like standard.
- It's a bit complex. I would
simplify this a bit. So,
so dav1d does things to abuse the calling
convention. You could define the calling
convention as
I've written a function and I want to
call another function. How is the data
shared between the functions? Because there's
a convention, what's known as a calling
convention, and what dav1d
does for optimal reasons is
create its own calling convention
sometimes. So if I wanna call Lex
Fridman's library, we got, we've got to
agree on a convention so that I can share
data with you in the assembly language
space. And one of the challenges
in assembly is every operating s- well, not every
operating system, but there are, well, at least
four that I can think of on
x86, Linux 32-bit, Windows
32-bit, Windows 64, Linux 64.
They all have their own calling
conventions. And so one of the amazing things
Loren Merritt did, who we talked about
before, was create a very lightweight
abstraction layer, so you could write your
assembly code once and it handled all
the calling convention stuff for you,
which was always a problem because you had
to manage four different variants. But
dav1d takes this even further, for speed
reasons it does its own calling convention,
within itself to bypass the
kind of rules, the rules
of, the rules of sort of functions and say,
"Okay, actually I'm gonna call a function this
way because I know it's
within my library."
- Does it have to be special to
every single operating system?
- Well, if it's custom, no. But
the, the, the challenge is
in general, yes, and in terms of, in
terms of each instruction set. So the
thing to also emphasize is we do this
on every instruction set. So every
instruction set has its own handwritten
assembly, which is even more crazy. And
that, that, that matrix has got
bigger in recent years because
of RISC-V, because of ARM64, because
of the new SVE. There's SME. x86 has
AVX-512, AVX. So we do runtime
processor detection. We see what the
machine FFmpeg is running on or dav1d's
running on is capable of, because
you could be on a laptop from 2008
where this isn't there. Runtime detection,
we set function pointers accordingly.
And then from then on, off you go.
- Or you could be on a machine with RISC-V.
- Yes. And in all that, we don't
even respect the calling
convention of the operating system in
order to be faster, because we know that
we are going to be called from within
our binary, so we can share data
without saving all the registers in
the common way, because that can lead
to loading and saving
registers on the L1 and
L2 CPU and gets us faster. So that's why I
said that understanding CPU architecture,
computer architecture is key. And this is
also why it's handwritten. I don't know
anyone, I've never heard any other
project than dav1d doing that. This
is why Kieran calls it, calls
it an art, right? It is an art.
- I think in a mass world, there isn't
something on billions of devices.
I know there are some specialist industries. I
know in high-frequency trading, they take this
really seriously, where they're receiving
feeds from a market, and they need to react
within X number of microseconds, and so
the instructions matter. But that's not
a mass, you know, a mass-produced thing
that's on a billion devices. That's
hyper-specialized, running on
hyper-specialized hardware. We're running on
all hardware from-
- Sorry to linger on it,
but, like, that's a really
counterintuitive, almost,
like, revolutionary
idea here, that there's a huge
amount of value to assembly.
Like, what are we supposed to take away from that? Like,
what... You know, there's a bunch of people listening
to this, they're basically
like, sorry, for myself
included, you know, I programmed
for many, many years in C/C++,
going up the standards of C++, fell in love
with C++, even meta programming and so
on, and then transitioned more and more
because of machine learning about 15
years ago to Python. And so, like, for
me in this Python world, JavaScript
world, now vibe coding,
where I'm just using natural
language, sitting in my jacuzzi, drinking a
drink... and just talking to the computer,
re- like, like record
stops. Why is the value
to go back all the way down to the low
level? Like, what's the intuition?
- Because you can get more power per dollar
invested, right? And
sometimes it's going to be a
problem that is limited by your hardware.
A good analogy is what
you see in quantization
in LLMs, right? And people are doing,
"Oh, I'm going to do that in FP8
or FP4 or some crazy things like
Microsoft Phi, who did it in 1.5,"
because you're constrained by memory, because
you're constrained by the machine you
can run. Because at some
point we are doing real time,
and I believe this is going to happen
on AI inference also, is that at
some point you need to get faster,
and you cannot always get harder,
More powerful hardware,
right? So you need to
analyze code and see
where, like, where is the
mission critical, where is the
things that are called nonstops. And
for example, dav1d is a good
example. It's going to be run
billions of hours per day.
That makes sense. It doesn't make
sense to be on the glue of FFmpeg-
- No
- ... uh, CLI. It makes sense over there.
- Yeah, and this has to do, also we'll talk
about it more, but your new effort, your
new company, Kyber, is doing
that kind of thing for
ultra-low latency, so the slogan
being, "Every millisecond counts." And
when you actually extremely highly
constrained in some dimension-
- We are also arriving at
a point where we've done
so many great things, but the hardware
is getting back to us, right? Because
cost is increasing, because we
need more power, and so you're
limited by either your
CPU, your RAM, or your
networking, and you need to
optimize, and this is where
value is going to be. Especially
because, like, doing AI is going to help
do the programming of, like,
business, right? And so
the core thing that you
will not be able to vibe
code are optimization for the hardware
to be as fast as is possible.
- I'd love to talk to you about who and how
should learn assembly, but first,
I think we need a bathroom break.
Quick ten-second thank you to our sponsors.
Check them out in the description. It really
is the best way to support this podcast. Go
to lexfridman.com/sponsors. And now back
to the episode. All right, and we're
back. There's this nice repo with the
assembly lessons. First of all,
do you think developers should
learn how to program in assembly, and how
would you go about learning it? What is
this asm-lessons?
- So I personally wasn't happy with the way
assembly is taught in books
and online, 'cause it's very
grammar-focused, and you don't,
in general, learn a language from
learning the grammar and the
structure. You learn a language by
asking someone what their name is, and you start
from there, and you go and solve real problems,
That you have when you want to
communicate. You don't learn sentence
structure, and this is the interrogative and the
adverb, and all, all the assembly books seem to be
doing like that, going through every instruction,
even ones that aren't really relevant,
explaining what they all do and how they...
It, it actually doesn't really change much.
So,
and the other problem that we have in our community
is assembly is taught sort of hand to hand,
like person to person, like blacksmithing
one by one. That's, that's the only logical
sort of analogy, and that doesn't
really scale online. It doesn't
do other things. So this...
I've started a set of assembly
lessons in the, in the way it's done in
FFmpeg, which is a little bit different to the
way assembly in general
for... I don't know. I'm trying to think the
other good big use case of assembly is in
embedded devices, in really low
power, cheap devices, and that's
completely different to
what we're doing here.
I think it would be good if you could highlight
the requirements, which are quite simple.
It's high school mathematics and C. And
actually not even C, really, really
it's pointers. To emphasize, yes, we've
talked about how brilliant this stuff is,
but high schoolers like
Daniel Kang have written
assembly in FFmpeg. I think there's been
contributions because of these lessons.
So it's really about
trying to get this dying art to
continue, because we've shown it's
possible with dav1d to
produce something amazing.
There's still a lot of codecs in
FFmpeg that are only maybe partially
assembly optimized.
And so it really, it really starts with basics and
continues, explains a lot of the jargon, a lot of
the syntax. It doesn't really
try and explain to you, you
know interrupt handlers and interrupt
instructions and all of these
different jump targets actually
makes this really vector focused.
- And describes all kinds of registers:
general purpose registers, vector registers,
Really nice examples. Oh, this is cool.
- It's a classic, yeah, it's a
classic example of FFmpeg. But
some of this assembly language is really
beautiful, and I think it's beautiful
because it's kind of like
flying a Spitfire. It's
really aviation at its purest, but also
pushing the aircraft beyond
what the designer thought was
possible. So we're abusing, for example,
sometimes cryptography instructions to
do certain things, and there's
a level of beauty and art where
it's really you and the processor. There's
nothing in between. It's you and the
joystick of the cockpit, and you move that
joystick, and it's physically connected to the
ailerons, and you can push that plane beyond
what it can normally do, and there's a
level of, yeah, beauty and amazingness
to go that. But I don't think
the sort of person-by-person assembly that is...
someone taught me, and I've taught multiple people,
is gonna work long run
just because of the particular
flavor and the way that we do it.
- It's literally no, I
should... I was gonna say
wizards handing it down. Um, I
realize I look like a wizard-
... wearing this hat. But you're
basically just like the sages, the wise
sages handing- ... down the craft.
Can I ask you about LLMs? Like-
... can they help?
- They had more of an understanding than
I expected, but they are still...
I've asked it questions,
and it still goes and
starts hallucinat- not hallucinating,
but making modifications, and then I go,
"Is it bit exact?" "No." "Fix it." And then
it just goes and does the same thing, and
it's going, it... There isn't the
corpus of information like Stack
Overflow to work on.
- There is not enough data to train on.
And this is the biggest issue.
Um, I started my career
actually doing some assembly for Itanium,
right? So the Itanium is a dead
processor type, right, which was done
by Intel and HP a long time ago
when they wanted to do 64 bits.
Well, they lost, and then
we got AMD, who did it, AMD
64, which became x86-64. But Itanium was
extremely interesting in
the sense that those were
processors who had a ton of
computing power to do floats,
FMAs, which is similar to what we
need now for, for LLMs, right?
And you could pack three operations per
line that could be loaded. So
basically, you had an output
of basically six billion
of operation per second,
but the bus, the memory bus only allowed
1.5, right? So your, your CPU
was four times faster, so
you had to do crazy things to,
to pack things in memory or
reuse the registers, and those
type of semantics, no language
could do that, right? So like I have
the Itanium programming book
because Intel did amazing books,
but that's exactly what Kieran says.
If you don't know what you're,
you're going to do, it's impossible to
read, right? It's a ton of jargon and
so on. While those lessons
are amazing because they are targeted to a
real problem, and you can do it yourself.
- And people have. People have. There are patches, and they
said, "Oh, I studied your lessons, and here's my first
changes."
- That's amazing.
- And part of that in the
lessons is a framework called
x86inc, written by Loren
when, when he was working
on x264, and it allows you
to do more things about
that to create a type of like
not caring too much about
different calling convention. And
we had a lot of students who,
Gave code to x264 using that
a long time ago, right?
So it's really doable, and I believe it's
necessary to understand
assembly language, even if
you don't do it much, to understand
what's going on inside your computer,
and that will make you a better
programmer. And I assure you that
because doing that, you will understand
some of the architecture of the memory
inside your computer, right?
Understanding register, L1, L2,
L3, RAM, SSD, disk, and so on,
which are very important
because then you have a good
programming culture that will
make you a better programmer.
- Uh, what do you think about the Rust programming
language? 'Cause that's a bit of a meme.
- We have very different
opinions with Kieran.
- I think it's valuable what they're doing
in terms of memory safety as a concept.
- Can it achieve some of the speed
up that assembly achieves?
- Oh, not assembly by hand, no. I think
that that's a given. C potentially,
but I see it very... It has
a very big Esperanto vibe
about it. It's like we're gonna solve
this, and we're doing this in a particular
way.
- Meaning it's a bit too utopian?
- There's a lot of focus on the self-importance
rather than solving real-world problems.
It reminds me of the Sinclair C5.
Sir Clive Sinclair of Sinclair
Computers built a car, and he said,
"Oh, everyone will be traveling around
in one of these electric cars." And it
was... Rust reminds me of that, where
I think the community doesn't
quite understand that
in order to get people to move, you have to
build something that's as good as, if not
better than what you have now. Yes, people
are doing Rust rewrites, but if they're,
if they only do 85, 90% of the feature set
of what we need, like things
like coreutils, that last
1% takes 99% of the time. To use
Elon's famous quote, "Prototypes are easy." Like
this kind of stuff is easy. But this, to get
a real electric car, you have to make a car as
good as, if not better than what we have now, and
Rust isn't in that stage yet.
I don't think anyone would
object to seeing Rust code in FFmpeg,
but it needs to work as well and support
the same unit testing as everything
else. It needs to be flawless. It can't just
randomly break. They can't just randomly
break ABI when they want to.
It needs to have, I think,
more-- I think it still has only
one compiler implementation.
So it, it's got to be as good as, if
not better, and saying, "Hey, here's
my utopia of memory safety,"
isn't enough, even though we
probably all agree that that's the goal.
- So I've done a ton of
Rust, and the two major
topics I had was adding
Rust modules inside VLC.
One of the reasons VLC got popular
and which was one of the main
architectural decision, is that
VLC is a very small core and a
ton of modules, right? And so
you can write modules in C, in
C++, in Objective-C, and anything
that is basically interoperable
with C. And so we did some Rust
modules, and so I have experience on
that, and I wrote some of it. And also,
like, my new startup called
Kyber, is an open source project
mainly done in Rust. What Rust
is extremely good in, in the
sense that it's a better C++ that cares
about memory and allows you to do
things about memory ownership
that no one else can do so far.
However, it's great when you start
a new project from scratch, and you
do everything in Rust. But
it's very not good when
you interop with existing part.
And some part of the Rust
community believes that they need to rewrite
everything, and everything will be better with
Rust. And the answer is like, no.
Like, I'm almost always, in all my
years of being engineer, manager, CTO of
startup and so on, don't rewrite, right?
- Is that-- That's the initial instinct
for a lot of people when they
show up to a code base
probably before LLMs, is
like probably because
they don't understand
the wisdom of the way things have been done
in the past. They say, "Well, we need to
rewrite it." Hence why there's a
thousand JavaScript frameworks.
- But the reason is the following,
and this is very important to
understand. It is an order of
magnitude easier to write
code than read code.
And you see that also with LLM. They
can write code, but analyzing is a lot-
... more difficult. And so
when you arrive and when
you arrive to a very complex piece
of code, right? You don't understand
it, right? Because it's so much
more effort to understand the code
from someone else because you don't
have the thought process. Um,
And often I joke about some languages
mostly Perl, for example
which has very complex
syntax. And imagine I am at my maximum
intellectual efficiency
in programming, right?
And I write the best code ever.
I will not be able to understand
myself six months later, right? Because
reading code is more difficult. So
very often you arrive, you don't understand
all the wisdom, all the business logic,
the reasons that were done that is maybe
not documented. And you say, "Well,
I'm going to write it." And the
thing is, no, you don't, right?
Because that's, as Kieran said, right? I'm
going to rewrite coreutils in Rust. And
then, of course, you arrive
very quickly at eighty percent
then ninety percent, takes a bit more time,
and then you got the last ones, right?
On the other side, right? So for new
projects, it's great. Everything related
to parsing files networking because of the
memory checker, boundary checker, it's
amazing, and there is nothing else.
To answer a bit differently for us,
imagine I take a piece of
software like dav1d or
x264, right? Which has a ton
of runtime in assembly, right?
Um, I rewrite the C part in Rust,
right? So it's more secure.
Yes. But then you arrive into
the assembly, and you can jump
anywhere in the memory because we
are doing handwritten assembly. So
even if I rewrite the C
part in Rust, for security
reason, you break all
the security when you
you write handwritten assembly
because we can jump anywhere.
So in my opinion, we need
to do something that is
secure assembly, right? So which
is compile time, check the
assembly, which is similar to
the checkasm projects that we're
doing on dav1d and x264 with VideoLAN,
is to start instrumenting your
assembly at compile time to check that
it's not jumping anywhere in the memory.
Because else you might rewrite
a part of C in Rust, but if
you want to have the same performances, you're going
to have inline assembly, and so you destroy your whole
security model. So that's a
bit what I think about Rust.
- No, I just wanna... I would say on
a personal level, I'm so in awe
about assembly. I actually--
Once in a... It never gets old, the
speed improvements to show sixty-two
x. So there are months, on
a personal level, I run
our internal test suite at work and just
see I'm still in awe at the gains we have.
- Well, there's a source of joy and happiness
with programming for different reasons.
But I think one of the greatest happinesses
is in the optimization of code.
And it sounds like you're, like,
at the cutting edge of that.
- I was like, "Whoa, that was cool."
- And in the community, I want to
speak about two people who are
wizards of assembly, right? The
two of them are actually working
living in north of Europe
Sweden and Finland. And
Henrik Gramner knows so much about Intel
x86 assembly that when we ask questions at
Intel about things, they tell, like,
"Why are you asking us, Intel?
You have Henrik. Henrik knows
better." He knows all the cycles
of almost all the SIMD
instruction by all the CPU
generation. "Oh, yes, this is a P4, this is
a Nehalem, this is a Core 2," et cetera.
That person is, like, the best
person on assembly in the world.
And he's the nicest
person that you've seen,
like, very... He arrives,
you don't see he's
amazing. And the other
one is called Martin,
Martin Storsjö, and he's--
they're doing mostly the same
on Arm, right? So Neon, right? And iPhones
and Androids and so on. And he codes in
assembly on his phone, editing
it with the crappy keyboard,
like virtual keyboard you
have while watching his kids
play in the playground, right?
Like, like this is just like
wizard level. So those
two people are like-
- Yes. So when you're
programming assembly at
that high level, a part of that is knowing
the architecture that you're programming on.
- Yes. On Arm in particular, yes
- ... Arm in particular. But x86, I mean,
these are complicated architectures, right?
- Yeah. But Arm in some ways
is more com... x86 with,
Out of order execution is not so bad. Arm,
you really need to understand all the
different generations of Arm processor
because they're all different. There's A72,
... et cetera, et cetera. And there's the Apple variant, there's
this variant, there's that, and you need to write code that
works
efficiently on all of them. x86, well, broadly
speaking, you have Intel, AMD, and you have
sub-variants, but generally
speaking, there's...
Something fast is gonna remain fast on all
of the variants, whereas in Arm it's a
completely much more complicated ballgame.
- We're taking a nonlinear journey
through history here, but we're
talking about Michael
Niedermayer. And I wanted to ask
about this. For a time there was
a split in FFmpeg and Libav.
- Yes. So in open source projects
sometimes you disagree, right? Um-
- You have such a nice way
of putting it, yeah.
- And the good thing is because of the
license, you're allowed to basically do your
own, right? Um, and this is normal, and
this has happened all the time, right? At a
point there was a GCC at the time of GCC 2
and EGCS which became then GCC 3, right?
There is what we told KHTML
with WebKit, with Blink. Um,
it is a same process. And also,
like when I want to do a new
feature today in VLC, I fork, I do
my thing on my own, and then I merge
back to the community. So there was a
split in the open source community on
FFmpeg, which become Libav and
FFmpeg. And after a few years,
well, the community merged back and
people moved on. It's a bit, um,
drama that is normal in open
source community, but forks
are even... They're important
because they change the,
the status quo of a community. Um
not talking about FFmpeg and
Libav here, but the, or the GCC
fork made GCC a ton
better because the, some
people wanted to change the
architecture fundamentally to make it
faster. And of course, it's
always question of people and
so on, but in the end you
realize that FFmpeg today is
better than it was before the fork. And
now, well, we're back all
together, right? And I spent a
lot of time, and, and Kieran can
say in the, in, in the community.
It's not often, to be honest, very
well explained because a ton of
the reasons are not very public.
But I think that's, that's
normal and that's good.
- Yeah. I mean, you're making it sound really
nice, but there is battle, there's pretty heated
battles inside open source projects. I
mean, it is a very passionate community and
you're kind of in a distributed way
have to define the direction of things.
So here looking at
Perplexity, "FFmpeg and Libav
split in 2011 mainly over project
governance, leadership style, and
development processes, not because of
a fundamental technical disagreement.
Uh, FFmpeg effectively
absorbed Libav's work
while Libav withered and most
distributions and developers moved back to
FFmpeg." Yeah, that was a, that was a weird
experience 'cause, you know, I'm a Linux user,
perspective, that was a weird experience
'cause, you know, I'm a Linux user,
so, you know, whether it's Ubuntu and so
on, all of a sudden, I think for, for a
for, for a little bit, Ubuntu,
I feel like, am I remembering
correctly, switched to Libav and-
- 12, 14, something like that.
Yes. Something like that.
- And then they switched back to FFmpeg.
I was like, "What is happening?"
So on the sort of you get
to feel the ripple effects
of the different internal
debates that are happening.
- To be fair, on Apple, when you type
GCC, you get Clang. Like they, they did
something like that as well, so.
- Yeah. So, so to me it's like the fork
was like heated drama, but most of the
development from Libav was
merged back into FFmpeg, right?
So de facto FFmpeg got a a superset around
Libav, and so that gave the user, because
in the end we work the user, for the
users, a, a larger set of features and a
ton of things that were, um, discussed.
For example, the debate on
reviews, on, on how we push are
something that now is completely settled in
FFmpeg and is following what mostly what
everyone in the community agrees,
right? So de facto, everyone who
was active on Libav came back in work on
FFmpeg because the
disagreements were fixed, and
in the end, FFmpeg is stronger than
it, it was before, right? And-
... I know people love drama, but, um-
- Well, my main concern, I
understand, and I think
looking at the, the long
history, it's all for the good.
But I do... I am concerned
because there's so few humans
that are critical to the success of open
source projects that I have seen it,
Be a psychological toll on folks
and, you know, sometimes leads to burnout. So
you have these incredible people that are at
the core of open source projects.
There is a moment that happens
'cause, like, what is the motivation of doing it?
Ultimately, it's because you're passionate about it
and it makes you happy. Then at a certain point,
you wake up and it's like, "This's been a
bit too much heat from the
drama. So, like, at the, at
the project level, the project
continues and often flourishes.
But sometimes there's these
individual humans that are just like-
- But-
- ... I've had enough.
- Yeah, but it's not just about forks,
right? So it's a g- very, uh-
... what, what you, what
you are referring to is
one of the most challenging and most
interesting part of open source
today is maintainers burnout, right?
And AI is a problem because
of that. And Daniel
Stenberg, which is the maintainer
of curl who's probably one
of the best promoter of
open source in the world.
He's, by the way, a member of the European
Open Source Academy with me, so I'm
very, like, humbled to be on the same
community as him, right? He's against what
he call AI slop, right? Because it
gives a ton of, um fake reports or-
... bad reports, bad patches, and
then a lot of maintainers have
a lot of burden to maintain the
software. And this is straining the
mine of open source developers
much more than forks.
Uh, and for example, the XZ
fiasco was because there was
one guy maintaining it, and he
got basically hammered by two
attackers who were asking him
questions nonstop at weird times at
night to block him, and at some point he
got fed up and says, "Okay, I can't do
that," and gave the commit
access to the attacker.
Um, so burnout in open source community is
something that exists but mostly it's
about maintaining things, right?
- No, for sure. But I wonder how do we
help that, 'cause those people are so
important. The-
... the human beings are so important
to the core of these pro- projects.
- So, so for example, now I am maintaining
a ton of multimedia and non-multimedia
library- ... as maintainer
because the maintainers
got fed up, right? Some on
VideoLAN, some outside of VideoLAN,
Because it's sometimes you need a tough
skin, right? Because you get, like,
it's not really attacks, but oh, this
is not working, this is not working,
and you feel it personally. And this is
also why resources or the,
the Google fiasco is,
was a problem, right? They don't
realize that in the end you have,
You know, it's like the same graph where you
see, like, everything and it's just like
one random open source project
that is maintaining the whole-
- The Nebraska thing, yeah
- ... internet. You see the one, right? The-
- Yeah, this is the meme. I mean, it applies
to, to a lot of open source projects.
But this is
the all modern digital multimedia
infrastructure, and then that thing at the very
bottom that everything
relies on is FFmpeg. It's
true. And then there's usually, you know,
a handful of folks that are maintaining
that.
- And FFmpeg or VLC, right, you
have a community of 10, 15
core developers, are not the
worst open source project. XZ,
which is even in more installations, is
one person, right? There is one guy-
- libxml is, uh-
- Yeah, libxml, right? There was a
big stop. No one is maintaining-
... libxml anymore, which is like parser,
the only library that is able to parse XML
everywhere.
- All the crazy edge cases of XML under
ridiculous circumstances, and they
get attacked by security researchers
because there's one other
crazy edge case that they haven't thought
of, and it's like, yeah, but the body of
knowledge to actually
resolve that is massive.
- There is one guy maintaining all the
time zones for everyone who is in the
middle of, I think, was it Nebraska or-
- Yeah, it could be, yeah
- ... South Dakota? Like, the mental health
of the open source maintainers
is something that large
corporations don't care or don't see,
right? It's just like, "Oh, yeah, I'm just
doing an open source report," and so on.
- Mm. Some of it is financial,
but some of it, and
people should definitely support open source
financially— ... all across the board.
But some of it is also, like, spiritual on
a basic human level. There's something that
happens,
like, with this image of F- FFmpeg and
so much of the internet depending on it,
where people almost,
like, talk down to the
folks who are carrying these
projects forward and maintaining it.
- In the security community, they certainly did. That
was one of, that was one of the things I think that
argument came out is
there was, there was a portion of the security
community who's like, "No, these guys write crap code.
They need to fix their crap code." I'm like,
"No, no, no, no. This is a guy's hobby project.
You've, you've have a security bot that's
gone and found some AI-generated stuff.
That guy didn't write crap code. It's just
an edge case to the 99.99999 percentile he
didn't think about because it's his
hobby project decoding Star Wars games."
- Forget the hobby project aspect of it.
It's, it's just hard work, and it's
it's beautiful, and it's like the, the right
approach there is to celebrate people-
... for doing incredible,
incredible work. It's, it's just
incredible that humans step up-
... not getting really paid at, at
first or maybe ever, and then they're
doing it out of the love of it,
and we need to, like, human
civilization runs on people like
that. We need to celebrate them.
- To, to give you an idea, I received death
threats on VideoLAN, right? And, um—
- You mentioned that to me. Like,
what, what is, what is behind that?
- So that must be, what, 2009, 2010, right?
Um Apple is moving from PowerPC to Core
Duo, um, that probably in 2006, and by
2009 or 2010, I decide that we are not going
to do new versions of VLC for PowerPC.
At that time, like VLC, we
were close to the number 1.0
release. We were four of us, right?
Like, just like, "No, this is not
possible." So I receive a death
threat with some powder in it,
right? It-- Remember there was
some- ... anth- anthrax threats-
... at that time, right?
And it was because I had
taken the decision to not
maintain the PowerPC port
anymore. And of course, it wasn't
anthrax, of course. It was some type of
flour and so on. But I received
that as a, with a letter of like,
"You, you piece of shit, you should die,
PowerPC forever," and so on. And it was 2009 or
2010, right? I was, I was young. I
was just like, "Why? What did I do?"
- Yeah, that can break your
spirit. It's like, why-
- My mother freaked out, right? We had to
go to see the police and so on. And now,
like, I'm going to say that I'm
quite happy that this happened
at that time. It forged
me a lot, right? I am...
I can see, I can take a lot of hate
on me. I'm okay with it, right?
- It sucks that that's part of reality,
'cause all the people that love VLC,
all the people that love FFmpeg,
like me, you know, I legitimately
hundreds—probably thousands of
times in my life had a smile on my
face because FFmpeg made
me happy, period. And how
many times did I get a chance
to say that? Zero. Until I
realized there's a Twitter account.
And every once in a while I'm, like,
messaging it.
- One of the things I like on the Reddit meme
about me, which I don't like this meme
for a lot of reasons, but... And
someone says, "Oh, JB is on, is on
Reddit," which I am, right? And I say, and
say hello, right? And then I got so many
people who say, "Oh, thank you for VLC."
And, like, I take pictures, and then
I share that to the Signal, to IRC.
Uh, yes, we use IRC on different-
- I saw as a quick tangent, you
mentioned IRC is like Slack for old
people. So you still use IRC?
- Of course.
- Yeah. I have it on my phone as well.
- Every day.
- Works fine.
- Wow. It works fine, huh?
- Works fine, yes.
- You have to power with a crank, I guess.
- No, but there's no-
- There's AOL. There's AOL
as your social media.
- There's no ads, there's no tracking,
there's nothing. Like, it's, uh-
- The biggest issue, to be honest, right,
compared to Slack is that it doesn't have
threads.
That's annoying. It doesn't have emojis
for reaction. Sometimes it, it would be
nice.
- IRCv3 has.
- Yes, v3, but no one does it, and
you cannot edit your messages.
Right? And the rest, it works
perfectly fine forever.
- But how do you communicate without emojis?
- Well, that's, that's why I
said it's for old people.
- Old people. All right.
- And we do emojis with like- ...
you know, the colons and dash and-
... parentheses, right? So.
- Old school. So anyway, you communicate on
IRC. What were you even talking about?
- Yeah, we are talking
about death threats and-
- Oh, damn
- ... but having people
thanking you, and sometimes-
... they got people who send me a message
and, and, "Oh, thank you for VLC."
And I always answer because I want to
validate the fact that you need to
thank the open source community.
- Yeah, please, everybody
listening to this, celebrate,
celebrate FFmpeg, celebrate
VLC, celebrate all the
incredible open source
projects, Linux, everything.
There's so many, there's so many... And
you know what? I mean, even outside of
open source, just celebrate companies that
create software that
you use a lot and love.
- Celebrate human endeavor. Celebrate the
human effort to not just build something
that's okay- ... build
something that is damn good.
- Yes, this is important, right? Like,
because as we said, right, we work for
technol- we do something very complex for
the normal people. Like, we want our
excellence in tech to be useful for everyone.
And this is why, like, this is why we
work, right? This is why I wake up in the
morning is because I want
people to use our stuff-
... Because it's making
everyone's life easier.
- Want to solve hard problems. Work on something
interesting, work on some interesting
technical challenges.
- As we are engineers, we love to build things,
right? When I was young, like very early, I knew I
wanted to build, to be an engineer. I wanted
to do cars, right? Maybe at some point I
will go back to cars,
right? But this is like we
want to build things that are cool
and useful. And they need to be
challenging, right? Because you
want your brain to turn on.
- When did the two of you first fall in
love with programming, with building,
with engineering?
- When is the first time
you programmed, Kieran?
- Microsoft QBasic. As I was on Windows
3.1 and Windows 95 Microsoft QBasic.
- Oh, wow. Wow. What'd you build?
- Uh, like a multiplication, just
counting loops like 10, 20, 30, 40.
- Nice.
- Then I thought I could do everything after that.
I wanted... I jumped from doing that to I want
to create a soccer, no, a
football, soccer video game.
And I drew all the, I drew everything out. I was like,
"I'm gonna do it." And I didn't quite grasp that
actually, didn't grasp actually it's a
massive piece of work to jump from BASIC and
drawing some pictures to a
video game, but there we go.
- Yeah. I think I did also BASIC and
then, uh, Turbo Pascal when I was,
yeah end of elementary school. But
mostly the first time I actually did
some serious programming was the
first year of you call that
middle school when you're 11?
Um, I was I lived in Italy for
a year in Florence and it was
amazing year. And like the maths teacher
told us to, to work in a programming
language called Logo, where you had a
turtle that was designing things-
... On the screen, and you would turn left
and right. And in the end, we used that to
do a very complex programming because
of course you could do things.
And, and this changed,
like, as I knew I wanted to
do things with computers and program.
- I don't think we quite talked about E-
H.264 properly. We talked about David.
Can we return-
- Sure
- ... backtrack a little bit to
H.264, this thing that powers
basically all of the video on the internet?
So, uh can you tell me the story of
H.264? And Kieran, you're
actually a contributor-
- Yeah to H.264. So, so H.264 is
a video encoder for the H.264
video standard. It dominates
internet video, but also other areas
such as Blu-ray discs. And Blu-ray discs are interesting
because the people that make them really want the
highest quality,
and there's some really cool high-end films
that have been encoded broadcasting and all
sorts of other areas. H.264
was a big step change
'cause it kinda happened at the right time
as well. A lot of the development took place
when HD video was coming out.
Intel Core 2 and Nehalem
CPUs were getting fast. You could
do real-time video. But the most
important thing was a key
sort of focus on visual
metrics. So industry and
academia for 20 years
before, was obsessed with mathematical
metrics or what's known as peak signal-to-
noise ratio. So mean squared error,
logarithm of mean squared error, and that
led to tons of issues because mean squared
error leads to blurring because you actually
want to, you want to minimize-- You want to
add a little bit of error to everything to, to reduce
the mean squared error as opposed to having a big
error, and that led to loads and loads of
blurring. So but hobbyists bucked that trend.
It was for their own personal
videos, mostly anime.
So there were two, there were two things they did differently,
and there was a big iterative feedback loop with the
community. They did some stuff differently.
Two, two big things, psychovisual
rate distortion, so using
block energy, trying to
compensate for human perception
when making decisions.
- So the psychovisual distortion,
that's the critical-
... thing. That's the thing. I mean,
it's kind of revolutionary, like,
that we can, like, rethink.
Don't, don't make it, like,
this kind of theoretic thing-
... of compression. Make it all about-
- Being pleasing visually to the eye.
- Yeah, yeah. So compressing in a way that
loses the least amount of information
for the stuff that matters for us humans.
- Yes, exactly. As opposed to what industry--
Some parts of industry are still
obsessed by this, which is
mathematical numbers that don't look
good in reality. And then adaptive
quantization was the other big one
where it was biasing bits against,
complex areas and redistributing
them to less complex areas like
grass. Grass has some high
frequencies, but it's kind of--
it's less complex overall compared to more
complicated things. And this came around by
ParkJoy. So ParkJoy was really
the canonical sample that
was... Is the running around in the park.
- This one.
- Yeah. So this guy was really the--
So this was created by Swedish
television in the beginning of
HD, and it was done on film, and
it was no expense spared in terms
of production quality, and it was
given away for free. This was really--
And this is the sample really that sorts
the men from the boys in terms of it has
so many challenges with the
trees, with the water, with the
grass, with the motion, with
the... I don't think there's still
been any public test sequence
as good as that these days.
- So for people who are just listening, we're
looking at a bunch of humans running-
... along a river, as you have the
reflection, a lot of really high
information textures everywhere, the
leaves and the lighting playing with
the leaves and all of this.
- You could show clearly that
encoders with high PSNR-
- Will blur everything
- ... will blur everything, and you could see actually
I could turn on psychovisual stuff, I could turn on
adaptive quantization, and
it would just look so much better. But
your metrics-- And these metrics are at
the time were considered so holy.
These are the holy metrics that are
untouchable. PSNR is the most important thing.
- Uh, can you speak to how do you
measure psychovisual stuff?
Like, how do you turn how pleasing
a compression is for a human eye-
... into a number? Is that even possible?
- That's what, that's what Netflix have been trying
to do with VMAF. They said they've used a machine
learning model.
- That's a more recent thing. But
back in when x264 was being
developed, that's by eye you're basically-
- It was by eye. It was developers on their
laptops. So it's not like even with
big companies with professional
screens or anything, it's-
And that was actually one of the goals, which
was I don't-- The developers at the time,
Loren Merritt in particular, said, "I don't wanna
test this on a thirty thousand dollar screen.
It's-- I want this to look good
on someone's laptop at home."
- Yeah. Brilliant.
- Um, there is another sample which is--
... A sample that is Planet Earth's
killer sample that I absolutely love.
And you are going to see why, right?
- Yeah, you're going to love this.
- Uh, it's a ton of birds, right, flying,
and the more it goes, the more there are
birds, and at the end,
right, it's almost like
you have millions of birds.
It's the most complex thing
ever to encode, right? And well, you're
watching it on YouTube, and you see how
bad the YouTube encoding
is actually, right? Um,
and this is, like, phenomenal
to, to optimize and
get perfect quality in
a constant bit rate.
There was a lot of optimization,
mostly by Loren also, um-
... on anime, right? For a long
time, anime was very badly
encoded because there was a ton of
banding, right? And so you see those
those issues, and there
was a ton of things. So
x264 is, like-- And today
it's still the reference
to any encoder, new encoder, AV1, AV2,
VVC, HEVC, everyone compares to x264.
- One of my favorite films, Cinema
Paradiso, I know the engineer
who created the Blu-ray, and he showed
me the comparisons of x264 versus
others, and the... it's
completely different. And I think
a bunch of guys in the Blu-ray world
started using x264. Um, I think the big
one was Chris Henderson from Warner Brothers.
He did the whole Fringe box set with that.
So quite, like, a thing a person on the street
actually watches and wants to look good.
And so they kind of took a risk in their
jobs doing that because they're in a big
company. That big company can buy whatever they
want. And they said, "No, no, no, I want to use this
free and open source thing so
that things look good for my, my
customers and build the best." And to
this day, I personally still try and
avoid watching the most
cinematic films on streaming
services and buy the physical
discs because they look,
they look good without even having to buy an
expensive TV. I think that's the key thing.
- And x264 is yet another example of
open source project. It was started by
Laurent Ehrsam when he was at École
Centrale Paris, where VLC was born.
And then you got a generation of
people like Loren, like Jason, like,
uh, Måns, like so many-
- Henrik from-
- Henrik, uh-
- Anton, uh
- ... and this is-- Anton, and
this is where the assembly
thing that we use now on FFmpeg,
dav1d and so on, was born, right? So
x264 is, like, amazing project with
people who were really all over the
world, and I think most of
them never met each other.
- But all of them, according to
Kieran, or large percentage, love
anime. There's several things I've
never got into, and one of them
is anime, and I need to
- I watch anime so much, especially at
the time. Like, at the time it was like
a lot of anime content doesn't
exist commercially, right? We
are before Crunchyroll, right? So
what happens is usually people who
love anime, who take some
things, some DVDs in
Japan and rip them because there
is no commercial offering. And-
... some of the people who are, what
we call fan subbers, are basically
translating themselves to make
subtitles, right? And at that time,
you download completely illegally. It
was the only way to do that, right?
And so all of that was
handcrafted, and it fits the open
source community, right? Because they
needed tools to encode, to do fan subbing,
right? One of the most amazing open
source projects for subtitles is called
Aegisub, and it's a subtitle... It's
done for anime, for, for South
Asian and Japanese languages.
- There are weird textures in
anime that I don't think you get
in real life content. I think that was a
key one, which was optimizing these weird
textures that you get- ... because
anime is not done in a normal fashion.
- Yeah. The way you produce it is not--
You, you mostly produce it, like,
on screens, right? Since a bit of time,
and you have all those gradients,
right? In colors, because they are very
easy to produce digitally, very complex
to produce in real life. And the
subtitles also are very complex
because you need to have often the
Japanese and then you need to
have the diacritics, right?
The what we call the rubi, right? Which
is the hiragana and the katakana for the
kanji. And then because of course
you, so that you have the official
subtitling, but you also need the English
subtitles or the French subtitles because you
want to learn that, right? And there
is so many things crazy on, on
subtitles and we had like crazy
samples on, on subtitles that
we've seen all around.
So this is an important
part of the, the culture, but
also because there was no
official offering. There
was no way of doing that.
- Uh, can you speak to the difference
between H.264 and AV1 and then
x264 and dav1d? This is this big
step. Can you help people understand,
are some of the streaming sites
moving more towards that direction of AV1?
- Let's be honest, all of
those codecs since MPEG-2
video are the same concepts. The same
concept about inverse transform, about intra
prediction, motion compensation,
entropy coding, all of them.
However, each generation gives you a bump
between twenty-five and fifty percent
more compression for the same quality.
And so you had the MPEG-2, you had the
DivX era, you have H.264, which was, like,
changing, right? H.264 improved so
much. And then you had more, right?
You had HEVC, you had VP9 at the same time
of HEVC. VP9 is a bit similar to HEVC in
terms of quality compression,
but it's royalty-free.
Because in multimedia there
is ton of patents and the
licensing after H.264
became out of hand, right?
And could cost hundreds of millions
of dollars per year. So it made no
sense. So Google did this
VP9 and the Alliance for
Open Media did this new codec called
AV1. So you can imagine that AV1 saves
between forty and sixty percent
less bandwidth than H.264-
... for the same quality, visual quality.
- At a given bitrate.
- At a given bitrate, right? So
that's really like you increase
the quali- either you set the bitrate and
you increase the quality, or you set the
quality and you decrease your bitrate.
But because now you move from, from
SD to HD and HD to 4K and 4K to 4K HDR,
like you increasing the size by like two,
factor two, three, four, right? So you
need to have better compression to
keep it in terms of something
that is manageable.
- It's more coding tools,
bigger blocks, lots more
sub-partitions in each block. It's
just exponentially more complex.
- It's more complex because
the encoder needs to search
more possibilities, right?
So you, for example
one of the things that is easy to
understand is to predict a block,
a color block to another, you have
directions, right? So you can go
left, right, bottom, up,
and then in terms of
Like the other quadrants,
right? What I call north,
northeast, northwest, and so on, right? But
that's eight directions. Then you can do
more direction. You can do sixteen
or sixty-nine or one hundred and
twenty-eight, right? You can-- And every
time your encoder is going to spend
more time to see, oh, well,
this block is exactly this one
and those type of tools that you
can bring, and the encoder needs to
check which of the tools are going
to compress you better. And so
I guess that AV1 encoding is two order of
magnitude more than H.264 in terms of CPU
cycle, right? Order of magnitude, right?
- Yeah. And as we discussed, CPUs are not getting
faster. You're just throwing more cores at the
problem.
- But also it's a fact that you encode
once and you have hundreds of millions
of users, right?
So for example, YouTube, a very good
example. YouTube encodes almost
everything in H.264, but the popular video
gets re-encoded in AV1
because it costs more, of
course, to encode, but you encode once
and you send that to millions, right?
So it's a trade-off between
encoding time and complexity-
... and CPU usage on the server
side and on the client side.
Because at the end, if you're distributing
a video to hundreds of thousands of
people and the size is
half of the other, then
it's better. It's better for your battery, it's
better for your modem, et cetera, et cetera.
- So we can lay out, let's say, the
top five codec container combos
would be H.264 inside MP4 containers,
AV1 inside MP4 WebM containers,
ProRes for nonlinear editing,
Inside MOV containers. So for people
who don't know, I guess ProRes is
- It's Apple's codec for editing,
originally for Final Cut Pro, and
it's designed to be fast to decode, fast to
seek, because an editor will need to move
very quickly. So it's a different use
case to the distribution element.
- There's no or very minimal
temporal compression in the-
- There's none, yeah. There's none in ProRes.
So you can cut, so you can do cuts.
- This is what we call
intra-only codecs, right? So
I'm going to explain
quickly what is IPB frames.
- Yes, please.
- Um, so I-frames, often key frames, but
is complete frames. It's like an image.
It's a JPEG, right? You have... You can
start, you see everything, right? And then
you, the next image can be a P frame,
which is a predicted frame. So you take
some part of the previous image saying,
"Well, I need the block five and seven
and forty-two,"
and you replace it, and then you just
give the extra information, right?
But that means that in order to decode
this P frame, you need to have access to a
previous I frame, right?
And then, of course, you have more
complex one, which are B frames,
which are B-predicted
frames, which can depend on
different type of frames, some
in the past, some in the future.
And so ProRes is an intra-only codec.
For the people who can see, this is-
- Yeah, that's a good one
- ... a very good one, right? So
I-frames are complete frames. Um
P-frame basically depend only on I-frame,
and B-frames can depend on in front.
- And this GOP, group of pictures, I
think the default for actually FFmpeg
for H.264 is like two hundred and
fifty frames, something like this.
- Yes.
- And to me, it's just, it's like
magic, that you could predict
that you could have a
complete frame every-
- Several seconds, that means
- ... several seconds, and then you could
still, you could have this chain of
predictions you make, and the fact that
you can-- The fact that somebody like me
can can use FFmpeg to compress
something and not notice
that the result still plays
back smoothly is like magic.
- You can even have, and we use that in tons
on Kyber, is what we call intra-refresh,
where basically it's there
is no I-frames present.
- You have no I... You have
one at the beginning.
And you never send an I-frame. You get a-
- How does that work? What is it?
- You build up an I-frame gradually
across as the stream continues, so-
- Ah. So you refresh certain
parts- ... of the image.
- But so you never have an I-frame. Like
this is intra-refresh that we use, right?
- That's even smarter.
- But for me, for me the biggest mind-blown
when I started was the B-frames.
B-frames means B-predicted
frames can depend
on frames that are coming in the future.
That means that in order to decode this
B-frame, you need to wait for the next
frame that is dependent-
- Yeah
- ... buffer that, decode that one,
so that you can decode the B-frame,
right? So the way you
decode the frame, the
decoding order is not the
same as the display order.
Right? That means the encoder
needs to be very clever and decide
that, "Well, you know, I'm going to
depend on things like in the future."
So this is like-
- It's incredible
- ... mind-blowing.
- The fact it works so smoothly every day
is kind of miraculous in some ways. It,
it works so... You can
have a stream that works
across the world on their decoder
versus one in the US versus one here of
different manufacturers, and they produce
bit for bit exactly the same material.
That's quite remarkable, and do quite complex
things, and getting more and more complex
and still be bit exact. There's a
lot of work that goes into that.
- There's a lot of knobs you can control in this
whole process. There's a lot of really fascinating
parameters that I've gotten to know
more and more over the years that
FFmpeg gives you complete access to. Maybe
you could speak to some of them. So first of
all, like obviously, we can lower the
resolution, we can lower the frame rate,
we can use different kinds of codecs,
as we mentioned, from H.264 to AV1.
There's ways to tune the
trade-off between bitrate and
quality, as we've kind of spoken to. You
know, you could do constant bitrate,
you can do constant quality, say RCQ, QP.
You can do the longer or shorter group of
pictures, GOP, that we mentioned. I mean,
all that kind of stuff. It's crazy.
Number of B-frames.
- Yeah. What is crazy is
that a ton of people's job
is to optimize those parameters, right?
A ton of people that you see at YouTube,
at Netflix, at Meta, and so on,
they're not writing codecs. They're
just like finding the right
parameters for the file they
have, for the format they
have, right? Because like something
that is for a movie or something that
is user-generated content from
your phone or a screen recording
or something that you're going to video
edit, you don't want the same things.
And there are thousands of people whose
job is just to optimize all that.
- Yeah. They're wizards. Hats off to them.
Uh, YouTube like to deliver, all the
streaming sites actually, to deliver
at scale. And like YouTube is
really magical because it's
not just doing like what
Netflix does, which is one way
broadcasting type thing. It
also has to upload videos from
all the places. So they're
also doing encoding at scale-
... for videos that are gonna
be watched by like five people.
And it still has to deliver
them re- like on a moment's
notice. No, no delay, nothing.
No... I mean, very minimal latency.
And also serve it in all
different resolutions. Like YouTube
is basically the web version of VLC.
- Yeah. Well, actually, it's funny
because, like Google Video, which
was something they did
before they acquired YouTube
was actually using the VLC
plugin so that you could run VLC
inside the web browser using the ActiveX
plugin. And so it worked
in Internet Explorer,
and you were actually running
VLC inside your browser.
Which is funny because today we have the
opposite, where we have VLC WebAssembly, where
we compile all VLC and FFmpeg
to decode, to run VLC in
inside the JavaScript virtual
machine with WebAssembly.
- Okay, there's this legendary
story that you pointed me to
that it was discovered via
WikiLeaks release of all seven
documents. The CIA was using a modified
version of VLC to basically try and
trick people, what? To steal their data?
- Yes, exactly.
- So can you explain what
the heck happened? What...
- So, so this was a surprise, right?
Because at some point, WikiLeaks,
uh mentioned some documents. There
were a few ones with something related
to Blu-rays and VLC, but the,
the most interesting one was the
CIA Vault 7, which, if
I understand correctly,
Was the CIA had, like, a custom version of
VLC where they had a
specific plugin. Yeah,
exactly. This is-- Like, we had to,
to write a press release on that.
- Uh, VideoLAN wrote a press release
saying the only safe source for getting
VLC media player is the official
VideoLAN website. I mean, I
suppose that's a security
vulnerability for
basically any piece of open source
software. Somebody can trick you.
- To download in a fake website-
... or targeted advertisement, right? That
was a targeted advertisement, to watch a
specific file you need to
watch with this custom
version of VLC. And it was the
normal binaries of VLC, except they
added one DLL, I think it was psapi.dll-
... which was basically reading your,
your document folder, encrypting
that, and sending that. And
the thing is, this is very clever,
to be honest because once you're
watching a movie, right, you're going to do that
for two hours, and you're not going to touch your
computer. And sometimes it's normal
because it's HD that your, your
fans are going up and say, "Vroom," and there
is ton of CPU usage because you're using
VLC, right? That's normal. But the thing
is, what you don't see is that actually
a powered version of VLC that is used
by CIA. We had exactly the same problem
with Chinese hackers that were targeting
Indian people, and that
got VLC banned from India
until I had to, to fight
in courts in India, the
Indian government, to unban
VLC. They didn't use VLC.
They took just one DLL, because
we signed the DLL correctly,
And they used that DLL
to do another program.
So you had the vlc.exe and was
calling libVLC, but it was
calling it into a fake one. And
they used that to target. Um,
there is not much we can do actually
to block those type of hacks.
- Yeah, and I think people should, for
all open source software, for all
software in general, people should pay
attention where they download the thing.
- Yes, because that means that they were
not downloading it from our website.
- Do the search engines help you?
- No, they don't.
- Just to clarify, 'cause you can,
you know, to prevent threats from
people manipulating SEO to get up
there on the links and try to-
- Absolutely not, right? We have a big
issue for, like, more than ten years,
is that there is a fake version of VLC in
Germany that was reported
for now for 12 years,
and Google basically decides to
not-- They know what's in it,
but the binary is too big
for their virus analyzer to
analyze it. And so while if you're
in Germany, you can go to a
website that is a fake version
of VLC with a custom installer,
and it's very popular in Germany because
their website is in German, and Google
mentioned that before VideoLAN. And the
weirdest thing is that it doesn't do
anything on your machine for three weeks.
Because that's how they do the detection.
And after three weeks, there is a small
program that is a service that install at the
same time that wakes up after three weeks,
and it start downloading spyware and
adware. And Google knows about it.
They've decided not to do
anything. The guys use dark SEO in
Germany to do that at some point.
And this is very damaging, right?
Because one of the things that they are downloading
is actually something that is replacing
your ads inside your machine, right?
- It's actually quite
surprisingly effective.
Whoever is doing it with
Twitter and X. With X,
I'll get emails about, "Your X
account has been hacked." And
however they phrase it, it
gets me to, like, at least
click on the email, not to follow
the thing, and then you're like,
"Man, whatever they're doing with
the psychology to try to trick you,
they're quite good."
- There is a security v-version of VLC, right?
You received an email saying, "Hey, there
is a security version update on VLC.
Think about updating right now because-
... it can hack your computer." You come.
It's a website that looks decent, and, uh-
... and you download. It's a new version of VLC.
Great. You don't know. A month later, you're hacked.
You have no idea. You're part of a botnet.
- Yeah. So make sure wherever you're
downloading stuff, it's legitimate.
I'm part of the botnet. Speaking
of which, so you've mentioned
that VLC sandboxing is some- is
something you're working on,
and it's actually something quite challenging.
Why is it important? Why is it hard?
- So VLC is a core with around
500 plugins, right? One of them
is FFmpeg, but we have, we
support so many other
formats. We support new
protocols, we support new filters,
we support weird architectures.
And in this release of VLC, you have
modules that are going to
call your drivers, right?
Uh, mostly the hardware decoders,
which are going to call
your Intel, your NVIDIA, your AMD driver.
And all calling FFmpeg, right? And
there might be a security issue. There
might be a security issue in the shader,
there might be a security issue in
VLC, in FFmpeg that is going to
basically crash. The
issue is that you running
VLC like every, every other program,
like Adobe, right? You're running it
on your machine, and it has access
to all your documents, right? So
the idea is to be sure that
you do a sandbox so that we
can protect from ourselves,
because inside the
VLC process is running some code that
is not even ours. Either it's open
source for other projects that we
integrate in VLC, or it's your
GPU driver or something that
is provided by someone else
inside. And so when we
crash, we want to not
allow people to do bad things, right?
Because one of the common way of hacking
people is to crash a program,
very often done with a
web browser, very often
done with PDF files,
less often with multimedia, but that could
happen. And when you crash, you launch something
on the machine of the person.
Could be a ransomware, could
be a botnet, right? So security of
desktop application is important.
On mobile, it's a bit different because most
of the mobile application are running on
inside their own sandbox. But for VLC, we
could run it inside one sandbox, but
the problem is that we need access to
so many things that it's
basically we would do-- we
would have all the permissions,
right? And so if you have a sandbox
and you put some holes everywhere,
it defeats the purpose, right?
So what we are trying to do, and
we're actually doing, is splitting
VLC into several processes.
One is decoding, one
is demuxing, one is filters, and all of
them run into their own sandbox so that the
whole VLC, a part of VLC
crash, like Chrome crashes
on some tab, right? It
crashes, but it does
not crash the whole program. And this
is what we're trying to do. And it's
difficult because it's a sandbox that
needs to sustain gigabits per second-
... of mem copies. Now, it's not a
website which is five megabytes or
10 megabytes. We're talking about hundreds
of megabits per second. So this is
why it is quite challenging. And
this is a research topic that
we are working on in order to have
multimedia player that is secure.
- This is all the kind of stuff you have to
think about when millions of people are using.
You've mentioned something somewhere
where like all the different
features of VLC, when you have that
many people using it, somebody will use
every single feature, and
they will tell you about it.
- Best feature in VLC is called
the puzzle filter, right?
So you click the puzzle
filter, and it transforms your
video into a jigsaw puzzle, right?
- Nice.
- And you can click and
move the pieces, right?
It's very, very useful when you're watching
a French movie, right? You're bored,
... because it's like very long things
or a love triangle, right? We've seen
that so many times, right? But, but you
need to watch it because someone, your wife
or-- ... told you to do that-
- To catch up
- ... or your boyfriend told you to do
that. So you're doing that, right?
And you can click and
move the pieces around.
It's absolutely useless, right?
Like, who cares about that?
First, it was done by a
math teacher in high school
in south of France to teach his
students about Bézier curves, which
is something that-
... everyone should know about, right?
It's very useful. But the code was clean,
so it got in VLC. It was merged
in 2010. Five years later, I
receive an email saying, "Hello,
JB. I have a problem with VLC.
The puzzle is too simple."
And I was just like, "What?"
And yes, the puzzle was
in the UI maximums by 16
by 16, right? Only 256
pieces. And he says, "I'm
sorry, but in a movie I love
puzzled, this is too simple," right?
So there is a commit of me, you can
check it online which is JB changing
that the dimensions are 256 by 256.
- Right.
- But my point is, so many unused features
are used by a few people, right?
There is a way to watch VLC
movies in command line
without any UI, right? It's-
- I saw that. You can do ASCII.
- ASCII art. Is it useful?
Very useful. Imagine you're
debugging... imagine you're debugging
a multicast network, right?
You have thousands very complex,
very complex networking stack,
right? You can SSH to all of the
routers and put VLC on it with
no UI, and you're going to see
whether it's black or it's not black, right?
So you see if or it's all green or not
all green, right? So you can see-
- Amazing.
- Yeah, right.
- This is fun.
- People don't realize there is so many things
in VLC, that are useful and they are--
they have users, because once you
have hundreds of millions of users,
you have people who use every feature.
- I would love to sort of
zoom in and talk a little bit more
about the distinction between kind of
downloading a file and
watching it offline versus
streaming. So the complexities,
the challenges of streaming.
Is there something we could
say about what it takes to,
stream files? Because we've
been talking about codecs-
... and I think a lot of that implies
encoding and decoding without the
having to communicate-
... over the network.
- Sure.
- Sure. So can you elaborate, like, what's
required to do over network stuff?
- Yeah, but it is less complex than it
seems compared to everything that we've
talked about. Especially
because the most complex thing
is not about streaming in terms of, uh,
streaming services, but
it was what was done to
actually broadcast through
satellites. Because in, in
most of the modern, uh,
broadcasting services, you can
pause and you can go on. But when you're
sending live streaming, whether it's
broadcast or live for streaming
services which are live, this is
much more difficult because you
need to encode in real time. You--
When you go on a satellite, you have a
specific size of the link, right? You
cannot have a burst-
... of bandwidth even for a second,
right? Because you don't have the
space for that in your total
file. However, there is
different types of challenges, which
are interesting challenges, but
I think they are less complex
than the one we've seen with late
'90s and early 2000s about broadcasting
and streaming through satellite.
- They're different. They are control systems challenges,
whereas, whereas some are more mathematical.
I think that's the difference.
- In the streaming world, what you have is called,
what we call adaptive streaming, because the
difficulty-- And it's not really a
video problem, it's mostly a CDN
problem, is that you might have too many people
watching the same thing at the same time,
and it's a congestion of
the network, right? So your
player has difficulty downloading
things fast enough to play
them. So what happens is that locally,
the player is going to read a lower
resolution-
... of it. But there are some very clever
algorithms to do that, but most of it
is quite basic, to be honest.
- Even on the buffering
side, it's pretty basic.
- Yeah, you start to download a
segment, what we call a segment,
and then you time, right? And
if it takes more than 50%
of the time to download a segment, you
go down to... Right. And the difficulty
is more about when do you go
up in bandwidth, in quality.
But this is not very complex to do.
When you encode, you're going to
encode seven resolutions, right?
And, and you're going to give the
bitrate. The difficulty is to have
your encoder gives the same bitrate,
but it's not as strict as
it, it used to be. So-
- Uh, probably YouTube has to
figure out how the human
psychology side of that, like
how pissed off do you get
when it's like very low bitrate and,
How long should it wait before it increases
the bitrate even though the connection
is better? Because maybe the, the
changes in the bitrate is what, like,
affects you psychologically.
- No, I think actually the
interesting one is the audio.
- That's true.
- The-- You can kind of
notice when they move from
full fat AAC to the there
are compressed versions of
AAC that use Spectral Band Replication. You
can kind of see it goes a bit tinny, and
that up and down is very
jarring. The video side
is a lot smoother, and there's less notice. It's
really the audio you can definitely, you can
definitely feel it from when it's moved you from
a different audio profile to one or the other.
I don't know. We're surprisingly
tolerant at skipping audio glitches. I,
I'm surprised people I know who
are not video engineers, how
tolerant they are, how tolerant
they are to watching sports at
30 FPS, for example, whereas
it should really be 60.
The world is a lot more tolerant to that, but audio
people are very-- There's-- It's an immediate
feedback mechanism of,
"Oh, something's changed."
- If you hear a glitch,
you realize it directly.
I get to fully realize that, I suppose. One
of the things I'm afraid of when I listen to
audio more and more, that I get to
notice every single tiny detail,
and that you can over-obsess when people,
people in general are able to kinda,
kinda blur their consumption. They can,
they can look past certain imperfections.
- But then when you combine like
an event that is, for example, a sport
event that is probably going through
satellite or-
... somewhere else and goes to a central
place for encoding, and then you
need to encode this older resolution
in real time. You don't have
time for QA. You need to push
that to CDNs. You need to add
probably DRM for protection.
You need to have that
over a ton of different devices.
Then yes, it is complex. But--
And also, like you're in the web
browser or in very much different
devices that you use for
television, where you had like a,
defined set-top box or cable box
that, that you know where you
control end-to-end. So it's a
challenge, but it's less...
I think the networking part while you
agree to have 10, 20 seconds of latency,
I don't think this is very difficult.
- Speaking of networking
and latency, so your new
effort, as we mentioned, is Kyber, which
is aimed at ultra-low latency. As you say,
every millisecond counts,
and you're applying that to
remote control machines like robots, drones,
computers. Can you tell me about it?
- Sure. If you start from where
we used to be, right? You used
to use FFmpeg to encode files, right? And
then we used FFmpeg and VLC to encode in
streaming services, right?
And then you need to go
lower and lower. And the question
was where up to where can we go?
And this question is very important
because there are many use cases
where you need to be fast,
and it's when you have
feedback interaction, right? We are not just
listening to something, you're actually
controlling it, right? Because-- And that's
the biggest difference that compared to
what we've done so far,
is that I need video
to have a feedback on something that is
happening live, whether it's a drone flying,
whether it's controlling
a humanoid robot from
distance, whether it's controlling
a hover, whether it's playing a
video game in the cloud
gaming, because this is,
What I did on a previous
job, right? I was CTO of a
cloud gaming startup. And
this is a very interesting
topic because you push to
the limit the network.
You need to be-- to care not about the
quality like we've done on video, and we've
talked about with H.264. You care about
latency, because a milliseconds is
meaningful when you're controlling a
car, right? For-- Well, you've-- you've
seen, you've used Waymos, right?
When Waymos don't work, and
that happens even if one percent of the
time, there is someone that is basically
remote controlling that.
And this is exactly
the stuff that we're building. It's
really an SDK platform to do end-to-end
control of machines.
- So the-- this comes up quite a lot in a
lot of different contexts in robotics.
So obviously, teleoperation,
teleop is becoming more and more
important including for training,
Robots via machine learning.
- Yes. And what we do is a bit
different from everyone else, is that
we take only one socket, one
connection, which is a QUIC
protocol based on UDP which
is interesting because
it's done for low latency. It doesn't have
two of the, what we call the TCP head of line
problem and the HTTP head of line
problem. It's ciphered by default, but on
the same wire, we send multiple
streams, like multiple tracks. We send
audio, we send video, but we also
send the commands, right? Uh,
mouse, keyboard, gamepad,
and so on. And we do
that while maintaining coherence,
right? Synchronization. Because
what people don't realize
is that all the clocks
actually drift. And when you're
controlling a robot, a robot is
going to have, like, two cameras, five
cameras, ten cameras, a ton of captors,
GPS, and so on. And if you
want to train correctly your
robotic AI model, you need to
have all those that are in
sync and current. And what we've done,
and it's all the stuff that we learn
on VLC in broadcast in real time,
and MPEG-TS that Kiran's know
well, is that we account for clock drifting.
And so when I record a Kyber stream,
a robot, I am sure that it's going
to be predictive in the way you
play it back. And so when you're
going to do recording and training
of your AI model, you need to
be sure that every time you
retrain based on the data,
it-- the data is going to stay
coherent. And clocks actually drift. Like,
the existing solution works with one
camera. Once you're going to a five or
six, it's more complex.
- Uh, so you wanna make sure that the visual
snapshot perfectly matches the
time it actually happened.
- Exactly. And also, if you're going to
control, right, I do something on robot, I
need to be sure that it is actually
happening at that precise time,
right? And so we have on the, the
server, which would be a robot, a
time of, like, re-timestamping mechanism
accounting for clock drift for
that, right? So that's one of
the use cases of Kyber to, to
control robots. Um, I
also think, like, remote
drones, remote whether it's
defense or non-defense, remote
cars, remote submarines. There is many
places in industry or remote surgery where
the expert cannot go everywhere
the machine is because it's either
dangerous or it's too costly, right? So
you, you allow people to have machines
next to you, right? The goal of
Kyber is to make distance disappear
because it's either projection of
skills or projection of power,
right? So imagine we are all
like— you've seen the Meta
Ray-Ban and, and everyone else, right? You need
to stream there, right? Because you're not
going to run anything over there, right? So you
need GPU power whether it's on a cloud, on a
phone to stream that. And so
all of these use cases needs to
be not about extremely low
latency, but real-time latency for
video. And so that means you need--
we're toying with the encoders so
that the encoders encode a frame in
four milliseconds. And, and, and
Kieran with his company also goes
under those type of latency,
because you need to optimize
at max the local latency, right?
Because it's the decoder, the
encoder and so on. Because this time is
going to be added to your networking time.
So-- And it's not just about low latency,
it's also about, like, reliability. We do
clever things like forward error
correction, right? So forward error
correction is you over-transmit
a bit of data, right, a
few percent and while
over-transmit, you're allowed to
lose some packets. Because
all of that is very difficult
over an internet network where you're
going to do things very far away. And
if you check that all packets are
delivered, you add a ton of latency. If you
don't want latency, what we
do is that we over-transmit
some data that you can retrans--
reconstruct on the client
side when there is things
that are broken, right? So
And we a few, a few days,
weeks ago, we were doing the
demo around Las Vegas for
the CES about we had a,
a, a rover that is fully 3D printed. It's
very simple. It's a car, right? It's a
small car with a telescopic arm, and it
was actually controlled from
France, right? And the, the video
was with a webcam and a very
small server, right? A small, a
small PCB was basically
running and send that to
someone that is on the
other side of the planet.
And so there is so many use
cases. You can also think about
having AI who are going to control
many drones and so on. And
technically, we need to be amazing
in video, we need to be amazing
at networking, we need to care
about any milliseconds in
networking, in encoding time, in
decoding time, and also you need to
integrate very low level.
- So sync everything together well.
But how-- Like, what kind of latency
can you get to? Like, why-- When you say
milliseconds, what, what's the goal?
- So my goal is four milliseconds
glass-to-glass latency.
- What's glass-to-glass mean?
- So it's easy, right? You have a computer
which is running a program, right? Probably a
video game, and this one is actually
running, right? It could be--
it's an example of a robot, right?
And you have the replicate that is-
... done through the
network. And, and you want,
if you take a, a one thousand
hertz camera, you can take a
picture, and you want that to be at four
milliseconds. Four milliseconds means two
hundred and forty hertz, right?
- Yes. Nuts.
- So far we achieve seven milliseconds
from a Windows to Windows
or Windows to Mac. And
if you look in the timing, most
there is around three point
five milliseconds inside the NVIDIA
hardware encoder and around
two milliseconds on the Intel
decoder, right? So, like, the encoder
plus the decoder is already six
milliseconds, right? So in order
to go down, we need either to
have some other type of codecs, or
some better encoder that are faster.
But four milliseconds
is, would be the grail.
- That's pretty nuts. I love it, though. I
don't think anyone's ever achieved that,
right? That's fast.
- You can achieve that with custom hardware-
... with SDI, with professional hardware.
But I want that to work
over the internet. I want
that to work with any robots where
you're going to have a small Jetson
Nano in it or a N150, right? I want
that because there is going
to be millions of robots or-
... drones are just rolling robots or
flying robots or, or swimming robots,
right? It's just you, a machine
that you control. And in order...
Either you need to teleoperate them
or when everything will be
fully autonomous, you need to
teleobserve them, right? You
need to check what's happening.
And in my view, in the future,
like, all those remote
cars will be teleobserved by an AI
model, which is just going to say, "Well,
everything is good." And when it's not good,
say, "Hey, there is a problem," and then
you have an operator, right? And this is
going to be about safety, right? When you have
your humanoid taking care of your grandma or my
grandma,
I want to be sure that everything goes
well, and I'm not in those type of horrible
scenarios where the robot is
dangerous. Or when I'm driving, I,
I want, like, the car to stop
when it should stop, and if
needed, someone takes care of that,
right? And so there is so many ca-
cases, scenarios about real time, and so
the goal of Kyber is to make real time
control of machine. Distances appear.
- It's incredible. And some of the same technology,
some of the same ideas that we're talking about
is connected to what you're doing.
- And for me, it's amazingly challenging,
right? Because I would say that on
video I'm doing okay, but
networking I have so much
more to learn, right? It's
um, about, like, congestion
protocols, bitrate adaptation
in real time. But it's,
it's quite funny. And so I
created this project and
we have fundraised in the US, of
course. But it's open source, right?
This is important, right? Like, we've not
said that, right? But everything on Kyber
is open source.
- So how do you make money?
- It's a dual license, commercial and
AGPL, right? You remember what you said-
... about licenses. Basically, if you
want to use Kyber in your product, you
must have your full product open source.
If you want to use this amazing
technology but not open source,
you pay the commercial license,
right? So the small people or the
hobbyist and the very small guys
who want to do that, they can use
the technology. They build something
that is open source and cool.
- That's awesome.
- And if you're a large company, you're
going to have the support, all the IP,
the right modification,
and so on. So yeah,
it's really cool and also I'm building
robots, and I love that, right?
Like we have-- Like the rover
we have is 3D printed. We are
finishing a demo where it's an actual
wing, right? Like a type of drone wings
that is also fully 3D printed. We are
trying to do a sailboat that is 3D printed.
And we'll work on some humanoids.
Of course, they are not going to
be very good robots, right? It's
not our job, but we're here
for everyone to make robots. Cool.
- Ah, you're talking to the right guy. I
love robots. There's a bunch of them
upstairs. And teleop is gonna
be really, really important,
especially as the number of robots scales
across the world. So 100%. Let's talk
about the future of multimedia.
FFmpeg, VLC, but some of the
codecs, we didn't really
mention AV2. So can we just
lay out what is AV2? What is the
hope for it? What is H.265, H.266?
- So AV1 is this codec that is
done by the Alliance for Open
Media, right? Where there
is Google, Netflix, Amazon,
Apple VideoLAN, where we try to make a
royalty-free very good codec,
right? And now it's being deployed.
But actually, the codec was finished
in 2018, but a codec takes years to be
used in wide scenarios, right? So,
AV2 is the next generation of this
codec. It's 30% better, right? So
if you keep the same quality, you get
30% bandwidth reduction compared to AV1.
- What's the connection
with the dav1d and AV2?
- We are going to do a dav1d 2,
right? That I call Devid because
de is two in French. Um-
- Ah, well done
- ... And you have to know that dav1d is an
actual what we call recursive acronym,
right? Because it means D, dav1d,
is an AV1 decoder, right? So
- Oh, nice. Nice. I didn't even
think of that. And people should
know that dav1d is spelled with a one.
- Yes. It's... And so dav1d 2-
- It's gonna be spelled with
a two. Please tell us
- ... is going to be D-A-V-2-D. Sorry,
I don't know how you pronounce that.
And again, we did a demo at the CES
of VLC running the first demo of AV2.
- So can you clarify to me the specification
of AV2? And then the encoding and the
decoding
- Sure. So the specification is like the
document which explains how the
codec is supposed to work, right?
- And that's really AV2.
- That is AV2, like H.264.
Right? Then you have an encoder.
The current encoder is called AVM,
and there will probably be other
encoders, probably one called
SVT-AV2, and those are
the encoder. The same way
x264 is an encoder to H.264, the same way
that x265 is an encoder for the H.265
codec. And the decoders for
AV1 is dav1d. The decoder for
AV2 is dav1d2. The decoder for H.264 is
ffh264 inside FFmpeg. The decoder
for HEVC is ffhevc inside
FFmpeg. And there is a
next generation codec
from the MPEG world after H.264, H.265.
There is one that is called H.266,
also known as VVC.
- So HEVC is H.265. VVC is H.266. Why is
H.266 super sexy- ... and so much better?
- So the question often we have
is why are there two names?
Because most of the time it is a
conjunct work from the ISO world
and the ITU, which is the
International Telecommunication Union.
- These are these two regulatory bodies.
- No, one is a private entity
and one is the United Nations.
- Which one is the private?
- ISO is private.
- In theory, H.264 is MPEG-4 Part 10,
H.264/AVC. And this is the full name.
- So it's the concatenation of
the ISO name and the ITU name-
... even though they work together. This
is, this is politics, historical, you know-
- And for HEVC, it's MPEG-H, H.265, HEVC.
And there is H.266,
which is also named VVC.
- Is there a high-level thing to
say about the improvement of-
- 30% each generation is a best summary.
- This is true both for the AV- ...
codecs and the- ... H.264, 5, 6.
- So the professionals who are listening to us are
going to kill us because they say, "No, it's
35%, 25%-
- "No, it's 50, 60"
- ... it's 50," blah, blah, blah. But
globally, you need to know that HEVC is
30% better than H.264. H.266 is 30%
better than H.265 because there are
so many cases and so many scenarios.
For example, there are cases, especially
for screen recording, where the gains are
humongous because you arrive, you have
the right tool that is done for that.
And so for a specific video, a new
generation is going to give you
70% gain or 80% gain.
Right? But there used to be a
ton more codecs, but now the two
main codecs for transmission are the H.264,
H.265, H.266, and the other is AV1, AV2.
- And I guess the major difference
would be the cost of encoding.
- Yes, and the royalty of the patents.
And this is the reasons why you
see the AV version of codecs, is
because they try to be as royalty-free,
which means no cost for the
patents as much as possible.
Because what you need to know, and
we've not talked about that so far, is
that multimedia is what we
call a patent minefield.
There is two places where you
have the most patents. It's
everything related to 3G,
4G, 5G, RF, and multimedia.
Um, because it's very mathematical, and
you can get great gains and so on. So
Google and Meta and Netflix
wanted something where it was
royalty-free. There are people who said that
they have patents outside, but they are
fringe patents, right? So it's
mostly true that it's patent-free.
- Oh, you should extend. Patent
checking was done as part of the
standardization process in AV1, AV2,
whereas patents are not even discussed
in the MPEG world. Patents
are off-topic completely.
- Can you educate me at the patents side?
- So usually, so MPEG does a
format, right? And then there is,
Everyone comes around and say, "Well, I
have all those patents for the format,"
and they do usually a
union called what's called
MPEG LA, MPEG Licensing
Association. And you
put all your patents in, and
then you ask everyone who's
using this format to pay for it.
- Wait, can you elaborate? What does it mean to have
a patent of a codec? Why is there many patents?
- Uh, imagine I'm doing
something where I'm going to
instead of doing blocks which are square,
I'm going to do rectangles, right?
- Oh, so every idea- ...
somebody patents it. Oh, man.
Oh, man. People and their...
How many lawyers are-
- I mean, it pays for a lot
of lawyers, right? Like-
- The biggest issue is not the following, right?
Because at time of H.264, the patents were,
let's call it, like, sane. But
there was so much money in that-
... that for HEVC, a lot-
there were a ton of things that were pushed
inside the specification, which are not
useful in 99.9% of the time, but so
just one could add a patent
on it. And so it became
that for HEVC licensing, there was MPEG LA
plus another patent pool
called HEVC Advance. Plus-
- That one
- ... um, I think Nokia was
outside of the patent pool.
- Yeah, a few of them are outside,
and some other one that's-
- And so it was impossible to license,
right? And I think that several months
ago, HP decided that they were
going to remove support from
HEVC in their Windows laptops because the
cost was increasing of those patents.
And it arrived- ... where a point where--
And there was uncapped patent. And so for
YouTube or Netflix, we could
talk about hundreds of
millions of dollars of
licensing for patents per
year. And they said, "You
know what? At hundred million
per year, you know, I could create my own codec,"
and this is what they did. And so that's why we
have the Open Media alliance,
Alliance for Open Media, where we
are part of, that is, that created AV1 and
creates AV2. We create also audio codecs.
But yes. So the main difference
would be that, and because you need
to work around the patents or go do
some things that are not patented,
a lot of things are different, right?
The basic things that were done in
MPEG-2 thirty years ago are,
of course, out of patents. But
so for example, there is things
like a golden frame, a S
frame or, or different type of-
- These are all patented ideas.
- Yeah, no, it's I can't believe it's not
butter. I can't believe it's not a B frame.
It's, I mean, it's kind of what
it is. In some ways, it's like a-
- Oh, so it's a different
variant of a B frame.
- Yeah, that's to try and
sidestep. Things like that.
- And so you need to have double
creativity, right? Creativity in terms of
being more efficient, but creativity
of being sure that you don't
infringe existing patents.
And so, for example, VVC
is, has all the patents of HEVC
plus new ones, right? It's
why AV2 tries to be as
royalty-free as possible.
- To what degree does FFmpeg and VLC have
to think about this kind of stuff?
- We don't, and one of the reasons
why VLC was in France is
that France rejects software
patents. So most of those patents
are illegal in France because
I once made the calculus that
if I had to pay all the licensing
fee for VLC, I needed to pay more
than two hundred euros per user,
right? It's the same in dollars.
But most of those patents
are invalid in Europe
because those are called, it's
basically mathematical patents or idea
patents, and they are not valid in Europe.
- Uh, let me just at a high level,
just out of curiosity. So the
meme online and the interwebs
on X and Twitter and so
on, and my own, I have friends in Europe,
this, the sense is that Europe is
not friendly to entrepreneurship.
They over-regulate, there's
too much bureaucracy, and so
on. Is there anything positive to say?
Is there hope for entrepreneurship-
- Yes
- ... in the future of Europe? Is
Europe over from a tech perspective?
- Just look at the two of us, right? It's
notable that there's two people from
the European continent on this podcast
talking about video. It's fair to
say the community is weighted heavily.
- What you probably don't
see yet is that there is a
new generation of
entrepreneurs in Europe and
mostly in France. UK has done
it since a long time because,
well, it's more, it's
more Anglo-Saxon type of
business, look at business. But
especially like what happened in
in France, and of course, sometimes a bit
overdone with everything called French tech,
but today, most of the people who
come on the market want to create
startups. Fifteen years ago,
it wasn't the case. Everyone
wanted to work on big companies
because when you failed in
in France, for example, twenty
years ago, fifteen years ago,
and you destroy your company, which
is normal for startup, right? You,
you were not allowed to create a new company,
right? There was a lot of stigma. The
stigma is gone.
... there is so many things happening
on AI in France and so on, right?
So there is sure, over-regulations. I,
I know that, right? I'm an entrepreneur.
But it has some good things also.
- I mean, is there some paralyzing
aspects? You know, if I look at
the case of somebody I've
become close with, Pavel Durov,
you know, he was blamed directly by the
French government for the kind of things
his, quote, "platform" was hosting.
I could see the same kind of stuff
basically, just as an example,
VLC being blamed for the kind of
videos that people are watching.
- But they tried, right? Like
we had, we had issues. Like-
- I mean, is that, that's the pressure that people
worry about because if you have to think about
that kind of stuff when you're
kind of just obsessed about-
- No, you don't think about it- ... and
that's, that's okay, right? Like-
- But what if they come in? When,
what if they show up and-
- There is no office. VideoLAN
doesn't have an office.
- I mean, this is what happened with Pavel.
They arrested him, right? So arrested him for
particular videos or, or a particular
content that's being shared on the platform.
- Sure. I don't have any platform.
Everything is on the client side.
- Yeah, but they're, they
can still arrest you.
- On what ground? I'm not sharing anything.
I'm not-- The content doesn't go through
my stuff.
- For sure, but it's still lawyer
fees. That's the problem.
- Yes, that's correct.
- It's paperwork. So like, actually, if
you had infinite trillions of dollars,
You would win easily because you're on
the right side. But the thing is, there
is a degree to which they suffocate you
with paperwork. That's the downside
of bureaucracy, through
paperwork, through process.
You know, it's the Kafkaesque thing.
- You have to realize that one of
the good things, for example in
in France or most of Europe, is that the--
Answering to a court order does not
make you bankrupt, right? It's not like
in the US, where it can actually
bankrupt you, right? There is-- The
way the law system works is that, like
I receive lawyers' letters every week,
right? And I can tell you that the cost
of lawyer fees for VideoLAN is less than
ten thousand dollars per year, right?
Right? So that's not really scary.
- I mean, similar with Pavel. The
intelligence agencies tried to like
say, "Can you put a backdoor in VLC?"
- Yes. Two of them.
- What, what do you say?
- No. Well, I was a lot less polite.
- I see you... Yeah, yeah. You're
basically saying, "Hell no."
- Like, if we had to compromise our software,
we would shut it down. This is clear.
- And what's the definition of
co- compromise? Like allowing a
government to do a backdoor-
- There is no code that gets into
VLC that we don't control,
and the way we compile VLC, you
would call me completely paranoid.
Like, we compile on
boxes that are offline,
where we start by compiling
the compiler. We do everything
offline on places that have
never been connected to the
internet. We-- The way we
do signing, there is double
signature. And especially
because, for example, we've
seen, and we believe it's a
governmental agency that is
not from the Western world
who tried to push a fake
binary into our own servers
and that scared us a
lot. And VideoLAN is open
source. How can you kill it?
Like, I move to where, right? I move
to Malta. I move to I don't know,
Cayman Islands, and I change
the domain name, and I
start again, right? Like, VLC is a
tool. It's a tool that is going to help
people doing things.
We are not a platform.
And for patents, well, I'm
sorry, but most of the
patents... Like, you shouldn't
be able to patent math and
matrices. Like, this is wrong.
- So does VLC ever, like,
censor the kind of videos it
can play and not based on
the content of the video?
- No, never. We never do that.
Because, like, VLC is completely
offline. It doesn't talk to
any server, so we don't know anything
that you're using the software for.
- So again, there's no government
that can say, you know,
like the French government come
in and say, "We don't want,
uh... I think anime is destructive
to society. We don't want any
anime not allowed to be..."
- No, they cannot, they cannot do that. And
also what they tried is to say, "Hey,
I want to know if that person watched that
type of video." And the answer is like,
"No idea."
- So no on that too. So
for surveillance, no.
- No, no, because the only infrastructure
we have is a downloading infrastructure.
There is no telemetry in VLC, right?
- It, it would be difficult 'cause
of the international nature.
It would be difficult for you to incorporate that
code because there would be someone in the UK and
someone in Germany and someone in
the US as part of VideoLAN who'd
be able to see that. It would
be extremely difficult.
- The only thing that we can do, which happened,
is like we had the issue-- We had the
case with some police in the US who
said, "We have a murder case," right?
"Uh, and the file is destructed or doesn't
play in that version of VLC. Could
you help us?" Right? We never have access to
the video. It's like a normal support, right?
- Oh, it's really about playing the file?
- Yes. And, like, I remember in the
middle of the Afghan War, right? I
received an email from
someone in the army, right? I
don't remember the grades, right? It was just
like, "We have a big issue with the latest
version of VLC because it doesn't play
correctly the file on an RTSP
server that we have where there is
all the movies." And he says
VLC is very important for the
morale on the troop on the ground, right? Because
at night I think it might be boring, right?
So they have a collection of videos to
watch or movies over there, right? So and,
and of course I did an update,
and I broke some support of RTSP,
right? So I gave them another version
just for them, right? Because it was
important. And because VLC
is completely open source, I
think it is allowed on the US
Army laptops, right? Because I
guess someone in, in the, in
the US military actually looked
at it and say, "Well, okay, this is okay,"
right? And the way we document how we
process, that was okay, right?
So the only way we work with
authorities is to help them doing support.
- That's amazing. That's
an amazing story. Yeah.
- We don't see anything happening on how
people use VLC, and this is strong.
- Do you feel the stress of this? So
first of all, millions of people
using it. Second of all,
the military using it.
Maybe sometimes pressure from governments.
- Yes.
- Does that, does that... That's
a, that's a small team, right?
- Yeah, but-
- How big is VLC- like the
core contribu- how many?
- Six, eight. But everything legally is only
me. Everything that is legal is only me.
- You're not stressed about this?
- I used to stress about that a lot.
But the thing is, we're doing what we
can for everyone, for the greater good.
We work that we make some
extremely complex technology
easy for everyone. We're a tool, and every
tool is going to be used for great things
and for bad things, right? You, you
cannot blame a tool, I think. And this
is, like, very important
for us. Um, I used to
be a lot, in a lot of stress.
I'm not anymore, right?
- What's the secret to your zen? I mean-
Over and over in the chats I've had
with you in the conversation
today about every
even tense topic, you're very
zen. What's the source of zen?
- I have a way of thinking about what is
the worst case scenario, always, right?
And the answer is, at the end, if I take
like a, like a chess player, right?
In the end, am I dead? Yes or no? Right?
And, and I do that nonstop, right?
And that's also how I do my,
my startups, right? Is that
I'm here to get something right.
What is the worst case? It goes
bankrupt. That's life. A company
lives, a company dies. That's
okay, right? Like, and so my
moral way is always like,
am I dying in the end? Am I
hurting someone? If the answer
is no, then too bad, right? Like,
oh, some lawyers are going to be
unhappy. What are they going to do?
Take all the money of VideoLAN?
Wow. They're going to have 50 grand.
Amazing, right? What are they
going to do with that? The source
code is out there. It's not
stoppable. Also because what we do
is good and it's done for everyone.
- That's beautiful. Uh, Kieran, you
said that there's an active archiving
preservation community?
I think that's super fascinating. You wrote
that they're stretched in budget, but they
see the extreme importance
of FFmpeg as a Rosetta
Stone so that multimedia
can be played a thousand
years from now. I mean, that's
a beautiful way to see FFmpeg,
VLC as a tool for preserving
visual knowledge.
- Yes, that's right. One of the
coolest communities in open source
multimedia, mainly led by someone called Dave
Rice, I'll give him a shout-out, I think
from City University of New York, is
the archiving community. They've done
so much stuff. They value the open
source, one, because yes, they lack
budgets, but two, they see the fact that
archiving video is important for the world,
and but being able to play that is
a big problem. Famously in the UK,
there was something called the New
Domesday Book, and they archived
lots of stuff on BBC microcomputers.
Within 10 to 15 years, no one
had the right software to play that. I
think it was 20 years or something like
that, and someone had to go and reverse
engineer this, and that was like 20 years.
Imagine that in a thousand years.
I think one of the great things about
FFmpeg is it's written in C. C is
the closest to mathematics you're probably
gonna get. The closest to logic is-
- Do you think in 1,000 years
we'd still have C compilers?
- Yes. We have languages that exist that
haven't changed too much. We have
mathematical notation that
exists. It will be like Latin. C
will be like Latin. It will
be a thing that you learn
from the past, but it will still
be usable in certain contexts.
So the archiving community are really
great practically. They, again, limited
funds. They funded the development
of the FFV1 codec, so that's a
lossless codec. So the archiving
community is really scared about the
act of compression losing things, and this
could-- They have a fair point in this, you
know. If they compress too
hard, it could change the
view of the material. There could be something
slightly different here and there, so they're really
concerned about things need to be not
just compressed well, but lossless
and be fast. And so they worked with
FFmpeg to develop a whole new codec
designed for fast software-based encoding.
They're really concerned about
resilience, so if they're storing on
tapes or other hard disks,
I lose some bits, I need to
recover quickly. I can't lose a
whole GOP because I've lost a bit-
... something like that.
So they're a really great bunch of people.
They funded GPU encoding in FFmpeg
to make FFV1 encode faster.
And it's really about
preserving the world's
multimedia heritage in a way
that's usable, and there's a lot of
great teams and a lot of archival
groups across the world who've,
who've chosen FFmpeg and
FFV1 as their archiving
solution. And they can
really provide us also super
specialist advice. They can-
... explain, "Ah, in the 1950s,
colorimetry was done like this on this
certain type of tape, and so there is
this special case that you need to handle,
and you'll never get this anywhere else."
- You see, they know things
on video that we don't.
Like, every time I talk to, was it Dave-
- Dave Rice
- ... or the people from the British, uh-
- British Film, uh
- ... Film, it's just like every time I just learn
something new, and I've been doing video for 20
years. They have, especially
on colorimetry and colors.
- Storage, these other things.
- I mean, they have a deep, deep
appreciation of the content itself, of the
video itself. And like, especially
when you're thinking of lossless,
they're terrified of losing
something essential-
... about the thing, and in so doing,
they're deeply understanding the
thing that is to be preserved, which you
sometimes might not be thinking about when
you're- ... obsessing about the actual
technology of the encoding and so on.
- And when you enter the rabbit hole of
film scanners, right? So you take those-
... those things to make to
digital, like, it's like-
... a huge topic that, like, would
take another five hours of podcast-
... just on that topic.
- On film, and there's a lot of film that needs to be
archived. Film is degrading. It's maybe not stored
in the right environment. The other thing is they
can... What they also do is, because it's open
source, they give this away, their
workflows, to countries who can't afford
to have archiving institutions, where
archiving is done by volunteers, it's done
by other things. They go and teach, you know,
in India, they teach children to do, to
do FFmpeg commands. They're
really great. They're really,
They're really the model community, the
model ethos of what we're trying to achieve.
They are
such a great bunch of people, so interested
in participating and being part of
something much bigger because they realize
the work they're doing in a thousand
years is gonna tell a lot.
You know, in a thousand years we
may be drowning in AI slop. This
stuff needs to be important and, you
know, archived well. What was life like?
- Yeah, it feels like capturing the
20th century and the 21st century is
essential because it feels like a transition
point, where we went from scarcity
of data to slop- ... oceans of slop, and
that transition point is good to archive.
- It's important, yeah.
- But people don't realize we are
losing today a ton of films.
There is a ton of things from the '30s,
from the '40s, and the '50s that where
there is no value-
- And tape. '70s and '80s, there's tape,
and there's not enough tape heads in the
world-
- To read all the tapes
- ... left to redo, so they have to decide what they
want to archive and throw away the rest of the
tapes. There's huge moral hazard, I guess
for want of a better phrase, around this
topic because
this is a digital record of human
history and they have to make decisions
that... And there's digital stewardship, I suppose, for
want of... I made that phrase up. That's not a real phrase.
Um, to make sure the world can have this
information in something that's playable
by everybody, not-
... playable on some device that,
well, it doesn't exist anymore.
- And then there's like, realistically
speaking, there's a needle in a haystack
where there's a lot of
value in archiving all that
footage, and then over time finding the
gems- ... that we don't know are there.
- Hey, there was something in that
corner that we just didn't-
- Yeah. Uh-huh.
- And that, that would've been compressed away
because it was some little thing. Oh, wow, there's
something there.
- That's it.
- And, and that's... They've made sure
that it's lossless. They can prove
mathematically that it's
lossless. They can run different
trade-offs for if there's bit fro- if
they lose a bit, a single bit flips, I
can make sure that I only lose a portion
of a given frame. We can do error
they can do error recovery on previous frames.
They can do all sorts of different things.
- Do you think VLC and FFmpeg will
be here 100 years from now?
- FFmpeg, yes.
- Yep, FFmpeg, yes.
- VLC, maybe.
- What's the future of...
Where is FFmpeg going?
Where is VLC going? Like in the
next... If you think about, like, five
years, 10 years, 20 years.
- Five years, 10 years is easy. The question
is after that, right? The question is-
... do we arrive at something
called holograms, right?
- Yeah, so will VLC and FFmpeg
expand- ... to whatever-
- Multimedia
- ... multimedia-
... so multimedia might become, I'm
sorry for the pothead expansion of
topic, but, you know if
you look at something
like Neuralink with brain computer
interfaces, it's very possible that
we start to consume what
multimedia means is whatever
codec, whatever data that our
brain wants to consume through the
brain computer interfaces. That's
one. Then virtual reality, of course.
- You will have VLC for Neuralink.
- Yep, and you'll have FFmpeg
-i input format human brain.
- Yeah. There's gonna be
codecs for the brain.
- Sure, 100%.
- Of course.
- Yeah, to compress neural
information, yeah.
- I mean, today there is like,
there are new codecs for-
- Whoa
- ... for example, what we call point cloud,
right? Or volumetric videos, right?
There is a ton of research on what
we call RGBD, right? So codecs for
depths that is useful for
robotics and for 3D things.
- Nice.
- There is a ton of codecs for
compression of 3D elements.
- Compression for astronomy.
- Uh, for example, on VLC, we also
have already a VR and XR version of
VLC. And also on Kyber, right? We
talk about Kyber. On Kyber, we also
like do streaming of XR content
on for the glasses who cannot
have enough power or inside
the Apple Vision or the Quest.
So we already work on streaming 3D,
XR, interactive, low latency. There is
something called volumetric video,
point cloud videos, so it's
not stopping. And yes, at some
point it will manage 3D data
inside VLC and FFmpeg,
right? It's obvious.
- So that's where it is moving,
like the community is open.
- Not everyone in the community
sees that, but like, as Kieran
and I, we are entrepreneurs, we know
where it's going. We see that, right?
- So I suppose that there is a tension
probably inside FFmpeg. It's like,
"Hey, listen, folks, we're really
good at doing video and audio,
so like why expand? Like let's do the
thing we're really good at doing."
- In order to answer that
question, we need to answer the
definition of what is multimedia.
And multimedia is a digital
representation of several
streams for the human senses. And we will
do that, right? So imagine there is now a
way to not have a mic, but have an odor
sensor- ... and a diffuser of odors.
It will get into FFmpeg.
- So your demuxer is coming up.
- Yes. Yes.
Of course, your demuxer has a new track
type that is basically odors, right?
And you already have-
- Smell, touch.
- It's like audio. You'll have a left and right nose
track. You have a left and right audio pair. It's easy.
- Yes, of course.
- Stereo smell.
- Stereo smell, yeah.
- So in VLC, for example, we already
have a plugin for haptic. It's mostly
for what we call 4D cinemas, right?
You know, those ones on hydraulic,
I don't know how you say
that. All the hydraulic-
- Hydraulic arms. Hydraulic, um-
- Arms. And where everything is moving,
like you have in theme parks, right?
And there is a data feed
synchronized where,
which is basically
transporting this information.
- Is there yet a standard for that?
- There are many standards, right? Um-
- This is... You make me so happy.
- And so of course, like we have a plugin
which is not in the normal version of VLC-
- That's good.
- ... that is basically transporting those type
of movements, which is physical movements,
which is haptic movements, right? It
is a human sense, so it will get in.
- That's such an exciting future.
Was it... I mean, it's a small
community of developers.
How do you pull that off?
Like if you're a contributor
to FFmpeg or VLC, it feels
stressful. Like it, just
looking on Twitter,
it's like it's a huge
amount of work to make
it work on all these different operating
systems, an incredible effort.
- No, see it in the other
direction. We are not
the contributors. We are the maintainers,
right? So we maintain for everyone. Meaning
that, for example, every year there is
around 150 people who
contribute to VLC and maybe
300 on FFmpeg, right? Our
goal as a small team is
to get all the contribution
in. So if there is more
usage, there will be more
contributions, and those people will
do the right module, the new
format, and so on. We care
about the architecture of VLC, the
architecture of FFmpeg, right?
Now we're doing things in VLC, which
is spatial audio, right? We did the
demo not long ago. There was
changes needed on the architecture,
and we did the first spatial audio
module. When it's going to add the second one, it's
going to be easy, or the third one is going to be easy,
right? Our goal, and it's going
to be the same for others or
haptic, right? We need to work the
architecture so that modules can
be added to add future capabilities.
So yes, we are going... We are
multimedia framework, so that's not
just audio and video. It's everything
that is timed and-Represent
something that you can sense. And if it's
brainwaves, it's going to be brainwaves.
- I think that's inevitable. Sorry.
- I love this on so many fronts
because, so FFmpeg and VLC are
pushing companies and pushing the world to
standardize. So for
example, to standardize-
... brainwaves, right? So
standardize... It would push,
like I hope Neuralink comes up with
a standard for, for multimedia
via brain computer interfaces
or for robots with haptic.
- By experience, what happens
is always the same, right?
You start, it's a new topic. There
is like five different standards
because everyone starts to do this. The
hype goes down because every time the hype
goes down, then people start to say,
"Well, you know what? You, we need to do a
standard." People, because two or three
companies, usually not the leader, but
the two or three followers do a standard,
and then we implement the standard and,
and then it's the end of the curve.
It starts to be more paper.
- And then the leader's kind of pressured
into it because it is better to do a
standard. Yeah.
- Example, 3D audio, right?
Six or seven years ago, it was everything
about 3D. You go, you had the Cardboard on
Android. You had two audio
formats. They're all dead, right?
And now it's coming back with
actual use cases, and we learn
from the mistakes of the past standard.
So it will be the same everywhere.
- And not try to avoid closed.
I saw somewhere you,
you didn't have too many nice
things to say about Dolby.
- No, I don't. Um-
- What is can you educate me on why,
where they went, what, what did
they do bad that made you mad?
- It used to be an amazing
company doing tons
of great things with amazing engineers.
They defined what sound was.
And now it's mostly-
- Lawyers
- ... lawyers and licensing things.
- Oh, so they're, yeah, it's, they're closing stuff
off. They're trying to make money on licensing.
- No, it's just like they don't
innovate as much as they did-
- I see
- ... and so on. It's a bit like I'm
sorry to say, right, like HP, right?
- Very true.
- Oh, since we talked about Twitter a bunch
in different contexts, do you have a,
do you have a favorite, do you have a, and
least favorite, most embarrassing tweet
on either VideoLAN or FFmpeg Twitters?
- The two, my two favorites are, "Talk is
cheap, send patches." I think that, that-
... embodies a lot of the stuff doesn't
get, as we've talked about, stuff
doesn't get built unless someone does it.
It doesn't just appear from the ether.
The other one that I like is "FFmpeg,
nothing is beyond our reach."
I think that comes from a US military satellite
patch where I think they, they invented some
kind of monitoring system that could see
the whole world, and this was released.
- Wasn't there something where FFmpeg
was running on a rover on Mars also?
- Yeah, so FFmpeg is used by
the Mars rover the Mars 2020
rover to compress pictures.
They really wanted—they
wrote a paper about it, and they really wanted to
use as much commercial off-the-shelf technology as
possible.
- Oh, that's cool.
- FFmpeg runs on Mars, so we are a
multi-planetary open source library.
- Nice.
- Very often we've seen—
- Nice
- ... Tweets for people using VLC in weird
places. A lot of the
people doing Formula 1
are in all the paddocks, they use
VLC to play the live feed. We've
seen the European Space Agency.
We've seen SpaceX, like,
monitoring the launches with
VLC, and, like, it, like,
fills you with joy, right? So-
- I've seen a particle accelerator.
- Oh, yeah, yeah. We had one of
the most amazing things that I
went for was to go to the CERN at the LHC
because they were using VLC to monitor all
the sensors on the ring because
the ring is 27 kilometers.
And so they had some analog cameras-
... and they were using some of the
capture cards to go to analog to
VLC, so VLC could stream on their
multicast network for the whole CERN
to access that. And, like, I visited
that in 2010 with Laurent and—
like, we fixed their issue in an hour or
something like that, right? Because it was
some parameters maybe not
well documented at that time.
And he said, "Okay, for the whole day, what do you
want to do?" And we visited everything. Like- ...
things with antimatter
and—and colliders and so on.
And that was, like, one of the most
amazing days of my physics background.
- Yeah, it's used, like, everywhere.
Any tweets, uh, Kieran, you regret?
- Tweets I regret?
- Or is it like that, how does the
French song go? Regret nothing.
- "Je ne regrette rien." Yeah.
- Yes. Uh, that's very
important for me, right?
Don't regret anything.
No, it's because regrets
are a tax on your mind, right? So learn
from your mistakes, but don't regret.
Because you've done it, so unless you
have a time machine to go back in time,
don't regret, right? It's going to just
tax your brain. Learn from your mistake,
sure. Don't regret.
- It's like it reminds me, it's beautiful. It's a tax
on your brain. It reminds me of the Johnny Depp
quote I saw where he was
saying, "Hate, you know, I
don't hate. That's, hate is
a very expensive emotion."
- Are you comparing me to Johnny Depp?
Because that would be your first one.
- Well, gentlemen like I said, I'm eternally
grateful for the software that,
you know, the two of you and
the bigger community have been part of
building with FFmpeg and VLC and everything
else. I'm eternally grateful for
the spicy tweets. Never stop.
And I'm grateful that you would
talk with me today and give me this
sexy hat. I feel like a wizard.
I feel special. And I feel
special to get a chance to talk and celebrate the
piece of software that brought me so much joy over
the years. So thank you for everything,
and thank you for talking today.
- Thank you for having us.
- Thank you so much.
- Thanks for listening to this conversation
with Jean-Baptiste Kempf and Kieran Kunhya.
To support this podcast, please check out our
sponsors in the description where you can
also find links to contact me, ask
questions, give feedback, and so on.
And now let me leave you with some words
from the legendary Linus Torvalds.
"Most good programmers do programming
not because they expect to get
paid or get adulation by the public,
but because it is fun to program."
Thank you for listening, and
I hope to see you next time.